Deficiency of the serine proteinase inhibitor (serpin) alpha 1-antitrypsin (alpha 1AT) is the most common autosomal recessive genetic disorder in Northern Europe. alpha 1AT is the physiological regulator of the proteolytic enzyme neutrophil elastase and severe deficiency states are associated with an increased risk of developing chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) as a consequence of chronic proteolytic damage to the lungs. Among the known mutations of the alpha 1AT gene causing severe alpha 1AT deficiency and COPD a few alleles are also associated with liver disease. When expressed in cell cultures, all these particular alleles cause intracellular alpha 1AT accumulation which appears to be a prerequisite for the development of hepatic injury. Liver disease is seen in only a small fraction of all patients carrying such alleles, however. The reason for this is not completely clear, but there is evidence that PI ZZ individuals 'susceptible' to liver disease carry an additional defect affecting protein degradation in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). We characterise a newly identified defective alpha 1AT allele PI Mwurzburg (Pro369 [CCC] to Ser [TCC]) associated with a complete intracellular transport block in cell cultures in vitro. The allele PI Mheerlen, a previously described different amino acid substitution in the same position as PI Mwurzburg (Pro369 [CCC] to Leu [CTC]) is shown to cause complete retention of the mutant alpha 1AT in the ER, too, whereas in the recently described mutant allele PI Q0lisbon (Thr68 [ACC] to Ile [ATC]) a significantly reduced alpha 1AT secretion from the cells was observed. Adenovirus-mediated recombinant expression of mutant Mwurzburg and Mheerlen, and of wild-type alpha 1AT in mouse liver in vivo showed that the mutant human proteins were not secreted into the mouse plasma, in contrast with human wild-type alpha 1AT which circulated at high concentrations over several weeks. In summary, all transportation deficient alpha 1ATs analysed have the potential to cause lung disease in the homozygous state or in heterozygous carriers of another deficiency allele, and they may also cause liver disease in certain patients. The mutant PI Mwurzburg and Mheerlen alpha 1ATs are completely retained within synthesising cells, and the molecular defect of transportation in these two alleles may be similar to that in the common PI Z allele. The molecular defect in the PI Q0lisbon allele (Thr68Ile) shows similarity with the immediately neighbouring Mmineral springs mutation (Gly67Glu)