Serum glutathione reductase (NADPH-GSSG oxidoreductase, EC. 1.6.4.2 (GR)) has been examined in cystic fibrosis subjects (CF), obligate CF heterozygotes, and control subjects. Serum protein concentration was similar in the three groups. Regardless of the units used to express activity (milligrams of protein or milliters of serum) or whether or not samples were dialyzed against water or phosphate buffer, mean serum GR in CF was greater than in control subjects (P less than or equal to 0.002) in all series over several years. Under the above assay conditions no difference in serum GR between control subjects and carriers was detected. Calculated and assayed values of combined control and CF sera agreed as did expected and observed 50% activity in 1:2 sera dilutions in CF, control subjects, and carriers. Addition of FAD to incubation media did not effect enzyme activity in the three groups. Differences between CF and control subjects persisted after dialysis in membranes permitting passage of molecules of approximately 12,000 mol wt or less. These findings would tend to exclude the effect of extraneous serum factors in explaining the diffferences between CF and control subjects. The percentage of initial GR activity after four days storage (0-4 degrees) was significantly greater in CF than in control subjects (P less than 0.025). The effect of heparin on serum GR was recorded as the percentage of activity after incubation with heparin vs. activity in the standard assay for individual subjects. The effect of incubation with 5 mug/ml heparin on serum GR activity was greater in control subjects than in carriers (P less than 0.0005) and CF (P less than 0.0005). Mean serum GR activity in CF and carriers was unaffected by heparin, whereas mean activity in control subjects was decreased. In no control was the percentage of initial activity with heparin greater than the mean of CF and carrier groups. Only 3 of 20 CF and 4 of 20 carrier individuals had percentages lower than the control mean. The CF and carrier distributions were clearly different from the control distribution. Serum GR was determined in seven non-CF individuals with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Activity in the COPD was different from CF and no different from control subjects. In none of these controls or COPD was serum GR as great as the CF mean. Serum GR in no CF was as low as the mean of control subjects or COPD. It is concluded that serum GR activity is greater in CF than in control subjects, carriers, and non-CF COPD subjects; that the difference in activity is not attributable to an extraneous serum factor, that the activity difference is not secondary to chronic respiratory disease; that in comparison with control subjects, GR from CF serum behaves differently after storage; and that serum GR from CF and carriers behaves differently from control GR in the presence of heparin