Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) plays an important role in the pathogenesis of pulmonary hypertension. In this study we determined whether the deletion (D)/insertion (I) polymorphism in the ACE gene may be associated with pulmonary hypertension evoked by exercise challenge in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). ACE genotypes were determined in 19 patients with COPD. All patients underwent right heart catheterization followed by a constant-load exercise test while breathing room air or oxygen. Subgroups were created of seven patients with the II genotype, six with the ID genotype, and six with the DD genotype who were well-matched with respect to age, blood gas data at rest or after exercise, baseline lung function, results of incremental exercise testing, and hemodynamic data at rest. The mean pulmonary arterial pressure (Ppa) and pulmonary vascular resistance (Rpv) at rest in the three subgrpoups did not differ significantly during breathing of either room air or oxygen. However, the Ppa after exercise challenge in patients with the DD genotype (55.7 +/- 4.9 mm Hg [mean +/- SD]) was significantly higher than in patients with the II genotype (42.6 +/- 7.1 mm Hg, p = 0.008). The Rpv after exercise in patients with the DD genotype was also significantly higher than in patients with the ID and II genotypes. During breathing of oxygen to diminish acute hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction, the Ppa in patients with the DD genotype (52.3 +/- 3.1 mm Hg) was higher than in patients with the ID genotype (40.5 +/- 5.9 mm Hg, p = 0.0049) or the II genotype (37.7 +/- 5.9 mm Hg, p = 0.0027). In addition, the Rpv in patients with the DD genotype was higher than in patients with the ID and II genotypes. These results suggest that D-I polymorphism in the ACE gene may be associated with pulmonary hypertension evoked by exercise challenge in patients with COPD. However, the number of patients in this study was very small for a genetic association study, and our results should be examined in larger studies