BACKGROUND: Although calcium is one the simplest and least expensive strategies for preventing osteoporotic fractures calcium supplementation is nevertheless not without controversy (Kanis 1989; Nordin 1990). The Food and Drug Administration in the US has permitted a bone health claim for calcium-rich foods, and the NIH in its Consensus Development Process approved a statement that high calcium intake reduces the risk of osteoporosis. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of calcium on bone density and fractures in postmenopausal women. SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched Cochrane Controlled Register, MEDLINE and EMBASE up to 2001, and examined citations of relevant articles and proceedings of international meetings. SELECTION CRITERIA: Trials that randomized postmenopausal women to calcium supplementation or usual calcium intake in the diet and reported bone mineral density of the total body, vertebral spine, hip, or forearm or recorded the number of fractures, and followed patients for at least one year were considered for inclusion. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Three independent reviewers assessed the methodologic quality and extracted data for each trial. For each bone density site (lumbar spine, total body, combined hip and combined forearm), we calculated the weighted mean difference in bone density between treatment and control groups using the percentage change from baseline. We constructed regression models in which the independent variables were year and dose, and the dependent variable was the effect size. This regression was used to determine the years across which pooling was appropriate. Heterogeneity was assessed. For each fracture analysis we calculated a risk ratio. MAIN RESULTS: Fifteen trials, representing 1806 participants, were included. Calcium was more effective than placebo in reducing rates of bone loss after two or more years of treatment. The pooled difference in percentage change from baseline was 2.05% (95% CI 0.24 to 3.86) for total body bone density, 1.66% (95% CI 0.92 to 2.39) for the lumbar spine at 2 years, 1.60% (95% CI 0.78 to 2.41) for the hip, and 1.91% (95% CI 0.33 to 3.50) for the distal radius. The relative risk of fractures of the vertebrae was 0.79 (95% CI 0.54 to 1.09); the relative risk for non-vertebral fractures was 0.86 (95% CI 0.43 to 1.72). REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: Calcium supplementation alone has a small positive effect on bone density. The data show a trend toward reduction in vertebral fractures, but it is unclear if calcium reduces the incidence of non vertebral fractures. [References: 41]