Chronic stable angina pectoris (CSAP) resulting from coronary artery disease (CAD) is common in elderly patients, and significantly reduces their quality of life. Myocardial revascularisation procedures in this age group entail significant risks, largely related to comorbidities rather than advanced age itself. Coronary artery anatomy is more likely to be technically unsuitable for revascularisation and angina more resistant to drug treatment. Therefore, elderly patients often take combinations of antianginal drugs. Calcium channel antagonists (CCAs) are effective antianginal drugs first introduced for clinical use in the late 1970's. They reduce myocardial ischaemia by both causing vasodilatation of coronary resistance vessels and reducing cardiac workload (negative inotropic effect). However, adverse effects related to abrupt arterial vasodilatation limited the tolerability of these short acting 'first generation' drugs (nifedipine, verapamil and diltiazem). Furthermore, short acting nifedipine may occasionally increase both the frequency of angina pectoris and mortality in patients with CAD. Since then, long acting formulations of first generation agents and new chemical entities (second and third generation drugs) have been developed. These are well tolerated and effective at attenuating both myocardial ischaemia and the frequency and severity of angina pectoris in most patients with stable CAD. Current guidelines on the drug treatment of CSAP propose that beta-adrenoceptor antagonists (beta-blockers) should be used as first line medication primarily for their prognostic benefits, and that CCAs need only be introduced if beta-blockers are not tolerated, contraindicated or ineffective. Despite this, there is a wealth of evidence from clinical trials that demonstrate equal antianginal efficacy for CCAs and beta-blockers. The presence of chronic heart failure and prior myocardial infarction are clear indications for the use of beta-blockers in preference to CCAs for the treatment of CSAP. However, in patients with both CSAP and hypertension, second and third generation CCAs may offer prognostic benefits of similar magnitude to those provided by beta-blockers. Therefore, antianginal drug therapy must be tailored to the individual needs and comorbidities of each elderly patient. [References: 91]