CONTEXT: The pathogenesis of appendicitis remains poorly understood. Despite new diagnostic techniques, appendices removed from patients with suspected appendicitis often appear histologically normal on conventional examination. There is increasing evidence of involvement of the enteric nervous system in immune regulation and in inflammatory responses in the gastrointestinal system. OBJECTIVE: To investigate the nitrergic innervation of (a) acutely inflamed appendices, (b) appendices classified as histologically normal from patients with a clinical diagnosis of appendicitis, and (c) normal control appendix specimens, using the whole-mount preparation technique. PATIENTS AND DESIGN: Full-thickness specimens were collected from 28 acutely inflamed appendices (age range, 3.2-13.4 years), 31 histologically normal appendices removed from patients (age range, 5.7-13.6 years) with suspected appendicitis, and 23 histologically normal appendices from patients (age range, newborn to 12.1 years) undergoing elective abdominal surgery (controls). Whole-mount preparation using nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) diaphorase histochemistry and neuronal nitric oxide synthase immunohistochemistry were performed. The density of myenteric plexus was measured with a computerized analysis system. RESULTS: The density of myenteric plexus in normal appendix specimens was similar to that of large bowel from the newborn period up to 3 years of age; this density decreased significantly thereafter. The myenteric plexus of normal appendix specimens from patients older than 4 years demonstrated smaller ganglia connected by thin nerve bundles, compared to larger ganglia and nerve bundles in large bowel. Significant neuronal hypertrophy was found in 55% of acutely inflamed and 41% of histologically classified normal appendix specimens. The myenteric plexus of these appendix specimens had even thicker nerve bundles connecting an increased number of ganglion cells. CONCLUSIONS: Differences in the architecture of the myenteric plexus in patients older than 3 years suggest an altered function and motility of appendix in the early years of life. The significant increase in neuronal components of the myenteric plexus in a high proportion of acutely inflamed and histologically normal appendix specimens is unlikely to have developed during a single acute inflammatory episode. This suggests an underlying chronic abnormality as a secondary response to chronic luminal obstruction or repeated inflammatory episodes in the histologically normal appendix