Asthma is orchestrated by cytokine products of activated T cells. Glucocorticoids are thought to ameliorate asthma at least partly through T cell inhibition. Consequently, other T cell immunomodulatory agents have been assessed for asthma therapy. Since these agents may have serious unwanted effects, attention has been focused on patients with severe asthma refractory to maximal topical, and additional systemic glucocorticoid therapy. Although gold salts show a modest but significant glucocorticoid-sparing effect in severe asthma, lung function is not improved and not all patients respond. The minimum duration of a valid trial of therapy is probably 6 months. Unwanted effects include dermatitis, hepatic dysfunction, proteinuria and interstitial pneumonitis. Meta-analysis of trials of methotrexate in oral glucocorticoid-dependent asthma have confirmed that concomitant weekly methotrexate for a minimum of 3 to 6 months enables significant (approximately 20%) overall reduction in oral glucocorticoid requirements, although only approximately 60% of patients show a significant response. There is little effect on lung function. Blood count and liver function must be monitored. Opportunistic infection is rare but potentially fatal. Cyclosporine, administered for at least 3 months, is effective in only a proportion of patients with oral glucocorticoid-dependent asthma, where it may improve disease severity and/or enable oral glucocorticoid dosage reductions. Regular monitoring of renal function, blood pressure and blood concentrations of cyclosporine is required. The evidence that intravenous immunoglobulin (Ig) is of any benefit in patients with glucocorticoid-dependent asthma is at present equivocal. The therapy is expensive and associated with a high incidence of unwanted effects (fever, aseptic meningitis, urticaria). The macrolides tacrolimus (FK506) and sirolimus (rapamycin) have end effects similar to those of cyclosporine. Brequinar sodium, mycophenolate mofetil and leflunomide are inhibitors of de novo synthesis of pyrimidines and purines, to which T cells are particularly sensitive. Such drugs may in theory be beneficial for therapy of patients with oral glucocorticoid-dependent asthma. Humanized anti-CD4, anti-IgE and anti-interleukin (IL)-5 monoclonal antibodies, and other cytokine inhibitors such as soluble IL-4 receptor have entered early trials. The worth of current immunomodulatory drugs is limited since: (i) not all patients respond, and response cannot be predicted a priori; (ii) the high incidence of unwanted effects makes it difficult to assess overall benefit/risk ratios; (iii) there is increased risk of opportunistic infection and (theoretically) neoplasia; (iv) there are many relative and absolute contraindications to therapy; and (v) there is lack of knowledge about the long-term effects, beneficial or otherwise, of therapy. [References: 56]