Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) blockade with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I) or angiotensin II (Ang II), AT(1)-receptor blockers (ARB) is the cornerstone of renoprotective therapy. Still, the number of patients with end-stage renal disease is increasing worldwide, prompting the search for improved renoprotective strategies. In spite of proven efficacy at group level, the long-term renoprotective effect of RAAS blockade displays a marked between-patient heterogeneity, which is closely linked to between-patient differences in the intermediate parameters of blood pressure, proteinuria and renal haemodynamics. Of note, the between-patient differences by far exceed the between-regimen differences, and thus may provide a novel target for exploration and intervention. The responsiveness to RAAS blockade appears to be an individual characteristic as demonstrated by studies applying a rotation-schedule design. The type and severity of renal disease, obesity, insulin-resistance, glycaemic control, and genetic factors may all be involved in individual differences in responsiveness, as well as dietary factors, such as dietary sodium and protein intake. Several strategies, such as dietary sodium restriction and diuretic therapy, dose-titration for proteinuria, and dual RAAS blockade with ACE-I and ARB, can improve the response to therapy at a group level. However, when analysed for their effect in individuals, it appears that these measures do not allow poor responders to catch up with the good responders, i.e. in spite of their efficacy at group level, the available measures are usually not sufficient to overcome individual resistance to RAAS blockade. We conclude that between-patient differences in responsiveness to renoprotective intervention should get specific attention as a target for intervention. Unravelling of the underlying mechanisms may allow development of specific intervention. Based on the currently available data, we propose that response-based treatment schedules, with a multidrug approach titrated and adapted at individual responses rather than fixed treatment schedules, may provide a fruitful strategy for more effective renoprotection. [References: 67]