AIMS: Elevated plasma homocysteine is an independent risk factor for atherothrombotic disease. Individuals homozygous for the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) 677C allele exclusively accumulate 5methyltetrahydrofolate, the methyl donor for homocysteine remethylation, in their red blood cells; this contrasts with 677 TT homozygotes who also accumulate significant levels of non-methylated folate derivatives. Those with the MTHFR 677 TT, CT and CC genotypes may therefore differ qualitatively with respect to folate utilization and hence their capacity to remethylate homocysteine. This study was consequently designed to establish whether all three genotypes confer different levels of atherothrombotic risk. METHODS AND RESULTS: The risk of atherothrombotic disease conferred by the MTHFR 677 CT and 677 CC genotypes was assessed using a 'restricted' meta-analysis approach applied to subjects from the first ten studies reporting a significantly increased risk conferred by the 677 TT genotype. The defined risk of the TT genotype in each of these ten studies was judged by us to denote 'genetic vulnerability' in the populations from which subjects were drawn. After proportional adjustment for the greater number of case TT homozygotes, the CT and CC frequencies observed in cases were compared with expectations based on the frequencies of these genotypes in controls. The observed CT frequency among cases was higher than expected in eight of the ten studies. In the meta-analysis, which included 1857 cases and 2942 controls, 847 (45.6%) cases, instead of the 777 (41.8%) expected, had the MTHFR CT genotype (P=0.010). CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the three MTHFR C677T genotypes confer different levels of atherothrombotic risk in 'genetically vulnerable' populations: CT heterozygotes have an elevated risk over CC homozygotes. One explanation is that the CT genotype actively confers atherothrombotic risk. An alternative interpretation however, for which a biologically plausible mechanism is proposed, is that CC is a protective genotype. Copyright 2001 The European Society of Cardiology