Hypertension increases in prevalence with age. Population based studies suggest that more than 50% of people over the age of 65 years may have chronic hypertension. Hypertension, especially systolic hypertension, is the single most common, powerful, however, treatable risk factor for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in the elderly. In order to assess the effectiveness of antihypertensive drug therapy among the elderly, with diuretics, beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers, a literature search was performed at the Cochrane Library, Medline and Excerpta medica. The Cochrane Hypertension Group identified 14 randomised controlled trials of at least one year duration with 21,785 elderly subjects where diuretics, beta-blockers or calcium channel blockers were used in the treatment group as first line drugs. In their meta-analysis (including one small trial with a central acting antiadrenergic drug) there was a decrease in total mortality (111 vs 129 deaths) and cardiovascular morbidity and mortality (126 vs 177 events) within the treatment group. The three trials restricted to persons with isolated systolic hypertension indicated beneficial effects in the treatment group with regard to cardiovascular morbidity and mortality (104 vs 157 events). Trial data on adverse effects is limited. In three studies, where adverse effects were reported, no substantial differences between treatment and control groups in measures of physical, cognitive and emotional function were found. Cardiovascular benefits of treatment with low dose diuretics or beta-blockers are cleared for elderly subjects with either diastolic or isolated systolic hypertension. Treatment with a long-acting dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker shows beneficial effects in reducing cardiovascular morbidity and mortality for elderly people with isolated systolic hypertension. Due to inconsistent findings in a subgroup meta-analysis of antihypertensive drug treatment in very old people, the efficacy of antihypertensive treatment in these subjects still remains unclear. [References: 21]