National and international societies have issued guidelines on the management of heart failure: The European Society of Cardiology, WHO, ACC/AHA Task Force Report, US Department of Health and Human Services, German Society of Cardiology. The therapeutic approaches to heart failure have undergone considerable changes during the last few years. The guidelines have to be updated almost yearly due to new results from prospective randomized studies. Although an agreement could be reached with respect to general measures and drug treatment, no agreement on mechanical devices, pacemakers and surgical interventions has been reached. The basis for medical treatment of chronic heart failure depends on diuretics, digitalis, ACE inhibitors, and beta-blockers. Calcium antagonists and other positive inotropic drugs, other than digitalis, should be avoided as far as possible. Thiazides, loop diuretics and aldosterone antagonists are needed for acute and chronic treatment of heart failure, alone or in combination (diuretic resistant heart failure!). Digitalis glycosides are needed in patients with atrial fibrillation with a fast ventricular rate or atrial flutter and in patients with systolic dysfunction, large hearts and symptomatic failure class NYHA III and IV. However, digitalis does not convert atrial fibrillation to sinus rhythm. Today there is no question that ACE inhibitors improve the prognosis of all patients with heart failure in all stages, if ejection fraction is reduced. Therefore, most patients after myocardial infarction or after having experienced pump failure due to myocarditis or cardiomyopathy are treated with ACE inhibitors and diuretics. The beneficial effects of ACE inhibitors seem to be most pronounced the worse the situation is. Relative risk reductions (mortality!) between 10% and 40% have been published depending on the severity of symptomatic left ventricular dysfunction. Those patients with high absolute risk have more to gain than those with low risk for any given "risk reduction", of course. Recent studies also indicate that most high risk cardiac patients profit from ACE inhibitors even if pump function is normal (i.e., patients with coronary heart disease, diabetes mellitus, cerebral vascular disease, hypertension) (15). AT1 antagonists can substitute for ACE inhibitors, if the latter are not tolerated due to cough. Up to now, beta-blocking agents apart from diuretics seem to be the best investigated drugs in heart failure. Large controlled studies with bisoprolol, carvedilol and metoprolol in addition to diuretics, digitalis and ACE inhibitors convincingly yielded positive results in chronic left ventricular failure patients. Reduction of mortality by 35% and even of sudden cardiac deaths by 40% have been proven beyond doubt. Thus, heart failure patients today should also receive beta-blocking agents in all stages of the disease. In the era of controlled prospective studies (evidence-based medicine), physicians are well advised to use only drugs that have been proven beneficial in large controlled studies. [References: 25]