Background, Infantile spasms (West's Syndrome) is a syndrome, which includes a peculiar type of epileptic seizure (the spasms) and an EEG abnormality often called hypsarrhythmia. Psychomotor retardation is frequently found at follow up. Despite huge advances in medicine it still remains a poorly understood entity and although with newer imaging techniques we are more often able to elicit the underlying "causes" of these spasms, still little is known about their pathophysiological basis and treatment remains problematic., Objectives, To compare the effects of single pharmaceutical therapies used to treat infantile spasms in terms of control of the spasms, resolution of the EEG, relapse rates, psychomotor development, subsequent epilepsy, side effects, and mortality., Search strategy, Published data: central trials register of the Cochrane Epilepsy Group, MEDLINE database, EMBASE database and the reference lists of all retrieved articles., Unpublished data: ISRCTN database, correspondence with colleagues and drug companies and appeals at international conferences., Selection criteria, All randomised controlled trials of the administration of drug therapy to patients with infantile spasms., Data collection and analysis, Data collection was independently extracted by three reviewers of all relevant publications using a standard proforma. Analysis included assessing study quality, looking for sources of heterogeneity as well as statistical analysis of the effects on control of the spasms, resolution of the EEG, relapse rates, psychomotor development, subsequent epilepsy, side effects, and mortality., Main results, We found twelve small RCTs (less than 60 patients enrolled) and two larger RCT (more than 100 patients enrolled) on the pharmacological treatment of infantile spasms. These fourteen studies looked at 667 patients treated with a total of nine different pharmaceutical agents. Overall methodology of the studies was poor, partly because of ethical dilemmas such as giving placebo injections to children. Two studies have shown that placebo is not as good as active treatment in resolving the spasms. The strongest evidence we found suggests that hormonal treatment leads to resolution of spasms faster and in more infants than vigabatrin. Response without subsequent relapse may be no different but if development might be better following hormonal treatment, then this might make hormonal treatments more attractive. One study suggested that hormonal treatments (prednisolone or tetracosactide) might improve long term developmental outcome compared with vigabatrin in patients who are not found to have an underlying cause for their infantile spasms., Authors' conclusions, A clear statement on the optimum treatment for infantile spasms requires further research. Until this is available, other factors will influence parents and clinicians about individual treatment. Hormonal treatment will resolve spasms faster than vigabatrin in more infants but this may or may not translate into better long term outcome. If prednisone or vigabatrin are used then high dosage is recommended. Vigabatrin may be the treatment of choice in tuberous sclerosis but even here more research is required. Resolution of the EEG may be important but this has not been proven