Background, Theophylline causes potent cerebral vasoconstriction which decreases blood flow in the non-ischaemic areas of the brain and increases collateral blood flow surrounding the ischaemic region., NOTE: This review covers an area where no active research is taking place. It will be updated if relevant information becomes available, e.g. on completion of an appropriate study., Objectives, The objective of this review was to assess the effect of theophylline and its analogues, aminophylline and caffeine, in people with confirmed or presumed acute ischaemic stroke., Search strategy, We searched the Cochrane Stroke Group Trials Register (last searched November 2003). For the first version, we also searched EMBASE (1980 to 1999), MEDLINE (1966 to 1999) and Science Citation Index (1981 to 1999). We also contacted the principal investigators of the identified trials., Selection criteria, Randomised trials of theophylline or an analogue compound compared with placebo or control in people with confirmed or presumed acute ischaemic stroke. Trials were included if treatment was started within one week of stroke onset., Data collection and analysis, Three reviewers applied the inclusion criteria, assessed trial quality and extracted data for the first version. The review was updated by one reviewer., Main results, Two trials involving just 119 patients were included; 6 studies were excluded. Trial quality was good. Both of the trials tested aminophylline. Analysis was by intention-to-treat where possible. No significant difference was shown in early case fatality (within four weeks) between aminophylline and placebo although the confidence intervals were wide (odds ratio [OR] 1.12, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.49 to 2.56). There was no significant difference for early death and deterioration (OR 0.87, 95% CI 0.41 to 1.88). Death or disability was not significantly reduced by treatment based on 73 patients in one trial (OR 0.64, 95% CI 0.24 to 1.68). Data for late death and disability were not in a form suitable for analysis. No data on quality of life were available., Authors' conclusions, There is not enough evidence to assess whether theophylline or its analogues, e.g. aminophylline, are safe and improve outcome in people with acute ischaemic stroke