Background, Terlipressin may reverse some of the circulatory changes associated with hepatorenal syndrome., Objectives, To assess the beneficial and harmful effects of terlipressin for hepatorenal syndrome., Search strategy, Electronic searches in , , the in , , and were combined with scanning of bibliographies and conference proceedings, and correspondence with experts and pharmaceutical companies. Last search update was July 2006., Selection criteria, Randomised clinical trials were included irrespective of dose or treatment duration. Included patients had type 1 or type 2 hepatorenal syndrome. Co-interventions were allowed if administered equally to both treatment and control groups., Data collection and analysis, Data were retrieved from trial reports and correspondence with the authors of included trials. Mortality was the primary outcome. Meta-analyses were performed to calculate risk differences (RD) for binary outcomes and weighted mean differences (WMD) for continuous outcomes. Both were presented with 95% confidence intervals (CI). Due to the limited number of trials, no subgroup analyses were performed., Main results, The initial searches identified 645 potentially relevant references. Six randomised trials were eligible for inclusion. Three trials are still ongoing. Three trials with a total of 51 patients assessed terlipressin 1 mg bid for 2 to 15 days. Co-interventions included albumin, fresh frozen plasma, and cimetidine 800 mg daily. One trial reported adequate bias control assessed by randomisation and blinding. All trials reported mortality. Terlipressin reduced mortality rates by 34% (RD -0.34, 95% CI -0.56 to -0.12). The control group mortality rate was 65%. Terlipressin improved renal function assessed by creatinine clearance (WMD 21 ml/min, 95% CI 17 to 26), serum creatinine (WMD -219 micromol/l, 95% CI -244 to -194), and urine output (WMD 707 ml/day, 95% CI -212 to 1625). Adverse events included headache, abdominal pain, cardiac arrhythmia, and hypertension., Authors' conclusions, Additional evidence on terlipressin for hepatorenal syndrome is needed before reliable treatment recommendations can be made. The dose and duration of therapy, and the influence of co-interventions remain to be established