Background, ., Osteoarthritis is a chronic disease of the joints, characterised by joint pain, stiffness and loss of physical function. Its onset is age-related and occurs usually between the ages of 50 and 60. It is the commonest cause of disability in those aged over 65, with OA of the knee and/or hip affecting over 20 per cent of the elderly population., Objectives, To establish the efficacy and safety of rofecoxib in the management of OA by systematic review of available evidence., Search strategy, We searched the following databases up to August 2004: MEDLINE, EMBASE, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, Cochrane Controlled Trials Register, National Research Register, NHS Economic Evaluation Database, Health Technology Assessment Database. The bibliographies of retrieved papers and content experts were consulted for additional references., Selection criteria, All eligible randomised controlled trials (RCTs) were included. No unpublished RCTs were included in this edition of the review., Data collection and analysis, Data were abstracted independently by two reviewers. A validated checklist was used to score the quality of the RCTs. Comparable trials were pooled using fixed effects model., Main results, Twenty-six RCTs were included. The comparators were placebo, diclofenac, ibuprofen, naproxen, nimesulide, nabumetone, paracetamol, celecoxib and Arthrotec. The evidence reviewed indicated that rofecoxib was more effective than placebo (patient global response RR 1.75 95% CI: 1.35, 2.26) but was associated with more adverse events (RR 1.32 95% CI 1.11, 1.56). There were no consistent differences in efficacy between rofecoxib and any of the active comparators at equivalent doses. Endoscopic studies indicated that compared to ibuprofen 800mg three times a day, rofecoxib caused fewer erosions and gastric ulcers at doses of 25mg and 50mg; the difference in duodenal ulcers was evident only at a dose of 25mg. Rofecoxib 50mg also caused more endoscopically observed ulcers greater than rofecoxib 25mg (RR 2.48 CI: 1.21, 5.11). Very few of the trials reported overall rates of GI adverse events although rofecoxib was found to cause fewer GI events than naproxen. Only one of the nine trials comparing rofecoxib to celecoxib reported on the overall rates of GI events and this was a comparison of the higher recommended dose of rofecoxib with the lower recommended dose of celecoxib. Similarly, the three trials in older hypertensive patients that examined the cardiovascular safety of rofecoxib and celecoxib used non-comparable doses; the results of these studies indicated that rofecoxib caused more patients to have oedema and a clinically significant increase in systolic blood pressure. This difference between rofecoxib and celecoxib was not evident in studies conducted in more general populations., Authors' conclusions, Rofecoxib was voluntarily withdrawn from global markets in October 2004 therefore there are no implications for practice concerning its use. There remains a number of questions over both the benefits and risks associated with Cox II selective agents and further work is ongoing