Background, In cystic fibrosis (CF) airway obstruction and recurrent respiratory infection lead to inflammation, long-term lung damage, respiratory failure and death. Anti-inflammatory agents e.g. oral corticosteroids are used since inflammation occurs early in the disease., Objectives, To assess the effectiveness of oral corticosteroids in managing respiratory complications in CF, particularly lung function and adverse events. Short-term use for a respiratory exacerbation (up to 30 days) will be examined separately from long-term anti-inflammatory use (more than 30 days)., Search strategy, We searched the Cochrane Cystic Fibrosis and Genetic Disorders Group Trials Register comprising references identified from comprehensive electronic database searches and handsearches of relevant journals and abstract books of conference proceedings., Most recent search: November 2005., Selection criteria, Randomised trials comparing oral corticosteroids given for 5 to 30 days (exacerbation) or more than 30 days (long-term) with placebo or no additional therapy in people with CF., Data collection and analysis, Two authors independently assessed study eligibility and quality., Main results, Of five studies identified, three (354 participants) met the inclusion criteria: two long-term studies with four-year follow up; and one to 12 weeks. Data were lacking on predefined outcomes; common outcomes were examined at different time-points and presented differently. Meta-analyses were not possible., In one study, oral corticosteroids at prednisolone-equivalent dose of 1 mg/kg alternate days appeared to slow progression of lung disease. At two and four years, % predicted FEV1 in participants in the 1 mg/kg group changed significantly more from baseline than the placebo group (P < 0.02). During the first two years, the 2 mg/kg group was not significantly different from the placebo group. Linear growth retardation was observed from six months after treatment started in the 2 mg/kg alternate days prednisolone group and from 24 months in the 1 mg/kg alternate days prednisolone group., Adverse events resulted in early termination of one four-year study. Year 10 follow up showed catch-up growth started two years after treatment ceased. Alternate-day treatment with oral corticosteroids may have impaired growth until adulthood in boys., Authors' conclusions, Oral corticosteroids at prednisolone-equivalent dose of 1 to 2 mg/kg alternate days appear to slow progression of lung disease in CF, but benefit should be weighed against occurrence of adverse events, especially development of cataracts and effect on linear growth. A risk-benefit analysis of low-dose alternate days corticosteroids is important and the short-term use of oral corticosteroids should be better evaluated