Background, Cystoid macular oedema (CMO) is the accumulation of fluid in the central retina (the macula) due to leakage from dilated capillaries. It is the most common cause of poor visual outcome following cataract surgery. The exact cause is unclear. Acute CMO, defined as oedema of less than four months duration, often resolve spontaneously. CMO that persists for four months or more is termed chronic CMO. Different types of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs) are used in the treatment of CMO which may be delivered topically or systemically., Objectives, To examine the effectiveness of NSAIDs in the treatment of CMO following cataract surgery., Search strategy, We searched CENTRAL in (Issue 3 2006), MEDLINE (1966 to September 2006), EMBASE (1980 to September 2006), LILACS (September 2006) and the reference lists of identified trials. We searched conference abstracts (sessions related to cataract) in ARVO 1975 to 2003. We contacted experts in the field and NSAIDs manufacturers for details on published and unpublished trials., Selection criteria, We included randomised controlled trials evaluating the effects of NSAIDs in the treatment of CMO following cataract surgery., Data collection and analysis, Two review authors independently extracted data. Since considerable heterogeneity was observed between studies we did not conduct meta-analyses., Main results, Seven trials involving a total of 266 participants were included. Four trials studied the effects of NSAIDs in chronic CMO while the other three examined the effect of NSAIDs in acute CMO. Of the studies examining chronic CMO, one study enrolled 120 participants, but the remainder had 34 or fewer participants. Four different NSAIDs were used and administered in different ways. Indomethacin was used orally and was found to be ineffective for chronic CMO in one trial. Topical fenoprofen was also found to be ineffective for chronic CMO in another small trial. Treatment with topical 0.5% ketorolac for chronic CMO was found to be effective in two trials. Three trials examined the effect of topical NSAIDs on acute CMO. The comparisons among these studies were of an NSAID to placebo, prednisolone or another NSAID. The study design differed between the studies in other important aspects thus they could not be combined in a meta-analysis., Authors' conclusions, This review found two trials which showed that topical NSAID (0.5% ketorolac tromethamine ophthalmic solution) has a positive effect on chronic CMO. However, the effects of NSAIDs in acute CMO remains unclear and needs further investigation