OBJECTIVE: The aim of this article is to extract from recent medical literature and nephrologic practice the facts and fallacies concerning the possible prophylaxis of contrast medium-induced nephropathy. DATA SOURCES, STUDY SELECTION, AND DATA EXTRACTION: A MEDLINE/PubMed search (1985 to January 2006) was conducted, including all relevant articles investigating the pathogenesis and prevention of contrast medium-induced nephropathy from a nephrologic critical point of view. DATA SYNTHESIS: Considerable efforts have been made to develop pharmacologic therapy for the prevention of contrast medium-induced nephropathy, especially in patients at risk, such as elderly subjects and those with preexisting renal impairment, hypovolemia, or dehydration. There is general consensus that hydration protocols implemented before and after imaging with contrast medium may be effective in preventing contrast medium-induced nephropathy. However, definitive and convincing data related to amounts to be infused, infusion timing, and type of solutions (half-isotonic, isotonic saline solution, or bicarbonate) are lacking. Forced diuresis with furosemide or mannitol and use of dopamine, together with concomitant hydration, have been proved to be ineffective or even more risky in the event of inadequate maintenance of euvolemia. Various direct or indirect vasodilators have been investigated (atrial natriuretic peptide, calcium channel blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and endothelin receptor antagonists), yet results have been inconsistent and inconclusive. Recent large meta-analyses concerning the protective role of antioxidant action of N-acetylcysteine have led to the conclusion that the statistical significance of the results is borderline. Preventive hemodialysis has not proved to be useful; on the contrary, it might worsen the clinical conditions by inducing hypotension. Hemofiltration, despite some positive studies, is too complex and cannot be used extensively. CONCLUSIONS:: It is believed that prevention is actually achieved by correcting hypovolemia, dehydration, or both. Normalization of body fluids is probably the true objective to be achieved by preventive measures in all patients, not only in those at risk. Because limited data have been collected in intensive care units, at present, no firm or specific recommendations can yet be provided for the critically ill. [References: 85]