Background, Asthma exacerbations can be frequent and range in severity from relatively mild to status asthmaticus. The use of magnesium sulfate (MgSO(subscript 4)) is one of numerous treatment options available during acute exacerbations. While the efficacy of intravenous MgSO(subscript 4) has been demonstrated, little is known about inhaled MgSO(subscript 4)., Objectives, To examine the efficacy of inhaled MgSO(subscript 4) in the treatment asthma exacerbations., Search strategy, Randomised controlled trials were identified from the Cochrane Airways Group "Asthma and Wheez*" register. These trials were supplemented with trials found in the reference list of published studies, studies found using extensive electronic search techniques, as well as a review of the gray literature and conference proceedings., Selection criteria, Randomised (or pseudo-randomised) controlled trials were eligible for inclusion. Studies were included if patients were treated with nebulised MgSO(subscript 4) alone or in combination with [beta](subscript 2)-agonist and where compared to [beta](subscript 2)-agonist alone or inactive control., Data collection and analysis, Trial selection, data extraction and methodological quality were assessed by two independent reviewers. Efforts were made to collect missing data from authors. Results from fixed effects models are presented as standardized mean differences (SMD) for pulmonary functions and relative risks (RR) for hospital admission; both are displayed with their 95% confidence intervals (95% CI)., Main results, Six trials involving 296 patients were included. Four studies compared nebulised MgSO(subscript 4) with [beta](subscript 2)-agonist to [beta](subscript 2)-agonist and two studies compared MgSO(subscript 4) to [beta](subscript 2)-agonist alone. Three studies enrolled only adults and 2 enrolled exclusively pediatric patients; three of the studies enrolled severe asthmatics. Overall, there was a non significant improvement in pulmonary function between patients whose treatments included nebulised MgSO(subscript 4) in addition to [beta](subscript 2)-agonist (SMD: 0.23; 95% CI: -0.03 to 0.50; 4 studies). Hospitalizations were similar between the groups (RR: 0.69; 95% CI: 0.42 to 1.12; 3 studies). Subgroup analyses did not demonstrate significant differences in lung function improvement between adults and children, but in severe asthmatics the lung function difference was significant (SMD: 0.55; 95% CI: 0.12 to 0.98). Conclusions regarding treatment with nebulised MgSO(subscript 4) alone are difficult to draw due to lack of studies in this area., Authors' conclusions, Nebulised inhaled magnesium sulfate in addition to [beta](subscript 2)-agonist in the treatment of an acute asthma exacerbation, appears to have benefits with respect to improved pulmonary function in patients with severe asthma and there is a trend towards benefit in hospital admission. Heterogeneity between trials included in this review precludes a more definitive conclusion