Background, Lung edema may complicate respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) in preterm infants., Objectives, The aim of this review was to assess the risks and benefits of diuretic administration in preterm infants with RDS., Search strategy, We used the standard search method of the Cochrane Neonatal Review Group. We searched MEDLINE, EMBASE and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL, The Cochrane Library), using the following keywords: <exp respiratory distress syndrome> and <exp diuretics>. These searches were updated in April 2003. In addition, we searched the abstract books of the American Thoracic Society and Society for Pediatric Research., Selection criteria, We only included trials in which preterm infants with RDS and less than 5 days of age were randomly allocated to diuretic administration. Of those trials, we only included studies in which at least one of the following outcomes measures was evaluated: mortality, patent ductus arteriosus, hypovolemic shock, intraventricular hemorrhage, renal failure, duration of oxygen supplementation, duration of mechanical ventilation, need for oxygen supplementation at 28 days of life, oxygen supplementation at 36 weeks of postconceptional age (gestational age + postnatal age), length of stay, number of rehospitalizations during the first year of life, and neurodevelopmental outcome., Data collection and analysis, We used the standard method for the Cochrane Collaboration which is described in the Cochrane Collaboration Handbook. Two investigators extracted, assessed and coded separately all data for each study. Any disagreement was resolved by discussion., Main results, Six studies met inclusion criteria. Studies available for this systematic review were all done before the current era of prenatal steroids, surfactant, indomethacin and fluid restriction. Furosemide administration had no long-term benefits. Furosemide-induced transient improvement in pulmonary function did not outweigh an increased risk for patent ductus arteriosus and for hemodynamic instability., Authors' conclusions, There are no current data to support routine diuretic administration in preterm infants with RDS. Elective administration of furosemide or any diuretic to any patient with RDS should be carefully weighed against the risk of precipitating hypovolemia. In addition, elective administration of furosemide should be weighed against the risk of developing a symptomatic patent ductus arteriosus