Background, Excessively heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB) or menorrhagia is an important cause of ill health in women. Eighty per cent of women treated for HMB have no anatomical pathology and so medical therapy, with the avoidance of possibly unnecessary surgery, is an attractive alternative. Of the wide variety of medications used to reduce heavy menstrual bleeding, oral progestogens are the most commonly prescribed. This review assesses the effectiveness of two different regimens of oral progestogens in reducing ovulatory HMB., Objectives, The primary objective of this review is to investigate the effectiveness of oral progestogen therapy taken either during the luteal phase or for a longer course of 21 days in achieving a reduction in menstrual blood loss in women of reproductive years with heavy menstrual bleeding (HMB)., Search strategy, We searched the Cochrane Menstrual Disorders & Subfertility Group trials register (searched 11 December 2003), MEDLINE (1966 to December 2003), and EMBASE (1985 to December 2003). Attempts were also made to identify trials from citation lists of review articles. In most cases, the first author of each included trial was contacted., Selection criteria, The inclusion criteria were randomised comparisons of oral progestogen therapy versus placebo or other medical treatments in women of reproductive years with regular heavy periods measured either objectively or subjectively and with no pathological or iatrogenic causes for their heavy menstrual blood loss., Data collection and analysis, Seven randomised controlled trials (RCTs) were identified that fulfilled the inclusion criteria. The reviewers extracted the data independently and odds ratios for dichotomous outcomes and weighted mean differences for continuous outcomes were estimated from the data., Main results, No RCTs comparing progestogen treatment with placebo were identified. Comparisons between oral progestogens and other medical therapies were assessed separately according to dosage regimen., Progestogen therapy during the luteal phase was significantly less effective at reducing menstrual blood loss when compared with tranexamic acid, danazol and the progesterone releasing intrauterine system (IUS). Duration of menstruation was significantly longer with the progesterone IUS when compared with oral progestogen therapy but significantly shorter under danazol treatment. Adverse events were significantly more likely under danazol when compared with progestogen treatment. Progestogen therapy from day five to 26 of the menstrual cycle was significantly less effective at reducing menstrual blood loss than the IUS. A significantly higher proportion of norethisterone (NET) patients having progestogens found their treatment unacceptable compared to IUS patients. However, the adverse events breast tenderness and intermenstrual bleeding were more likely in the patients with the IUS., Authors' conclusions, Progestogens administered from day 15 or 19 to day 26 of the cycle offer no advantage over other medical therapies such as danazol, tranexamic acid, NSAIDs and the IUS in the treatment of menorrhagia in women with ovulatory cycles. Progestogen therapy for 21 days of the cycle results in a significant reduction in menstrual blood loss, although women find the treatment less acceptable than intrauterine levonorgestrel. This regimen of progestogen may have a role in the short term treatment of menorrhagia