Background, The cause of Guillain-Barre syndrome is inflammation of the peripheral nerves, which corticosteroids would be expected to benefit., Objectives, To examine the ability of corticosteroids to hasten recovery and reduce the long-term morbidity from Guillain-Barre syndrome., Search strategy, We searched the Cochrane Neuromuscular Disease Group Register (May 2005), MEDLINE (January 2000 to May 2005) and EMBASE (January 1980 to May 2005) and contacted trial authors and other experts., Selection criteria, We included quasi-randomised or randomised controlled trials of people of all ages and all degrees of severity of Guillain-Barre syndrome who were treated with any form of corticosteroid or adrenocorticotrophic hormone. Our primary outcome measure was change in disability grade on a commonly used, validated seven-point scale at four weeks after randomisation. Secondary outcome measures were: time from randomisation until recovery of unaided walking, time from randomisation until discontinuation of ventilation (for those ventilated), mortality, proportion of participants dead or disabled (unable to walk without aid) after 12 months, improvement in disability grade after six and 12 months, relapse, and adverse events related to corticosteroid treatment., Data collection and analysis, Two authors extracted the data., Main results, Six trials with 587 participants provided data for our primary outcome measure. The overall evidence showed no significant difference between the corticosteroid and non-corticosteroid treated patients in disability grade. In four trials of oral corticosteroids with 120 participants in total, there was significantly less improvement after four weeks with corticosteroids than without corticosteroids (weighted mean difference of 0.82 of a disability grade less improvement, 95% confidence intervals 0.17 to 1.47). In two trials with a combined total of 467 participants, there was a trend towards more benefit from intravenous corticosteroids which was not quite significant, weighted mean difference 0.17 (95% confidence intervals -0.06 to 0.39) of a disability grade more improvement after four weeks than with placebo. There were no important significant differences between the corticosteroid-treated participants and the control group in any of the secondary outcome measures. Diabetes was significantly more common and hypertension much less common in the corticosteroid-treated participants., Authors' conclusions, Limited evidence shows that oral corticosteroids significantly slow recovery from Guillain-Barre syndrome. Substantial evidence shows that intravenous methylprednisolone alone does not produce significant benefit or harm. In combination with intravenous immunoglobulin, intravenous methylprednisolone may hasten recovery but does not significantly affect the long-term outcome. More research is needed and more effective treatments for Guillain-Barre syndrome should be sought