Background, Acute traumatic brain injury is a major cause of death and disability. Calcium channel blockers (calcium antagonists) have been used in an attempt to prevent cerebral vasospasm after injury, maintain blood flow to the brain, and so prevent further damage., Objectives, To estimate the effects of calcium channel blockers in patients with acute traumatic brain injury, and in a subgroup of brain injury patients with traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage., Search strategy, We searched the Cochrane Injuries Group's Specialised Register, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE, EMBASE and the reference lists of relevant articles. We also contacted experts in the field. The searches were updated in November 2005., Selection criteria, Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) in patients with all levels of severity of clinically diagnosed acute traumatic brain injury., Data collection and analysis, Two authors independently assessed the identified studies for eligibility and extracted data from each study. Summary odds ratios were calculated using the Mantel-Haenszel method., Main results, Six RCTs involving 1862 participants were included. The effect of calcium channel blockers on the risk of death was reported in five of the RCTs. The pooled odds ratio (OR) for the five studies was 0.91 (95% confidence interval [95% CI] 0.70 to 1.16). For the five RCTs that reported death and severe disability (unfavourable outcome), the pooled OR 0.97 (95%CI 0.81 to 1.18). In the two RCTs which reported the risk of death in a subgroup of traumatic subarachnoid haemorrhage patients, the pooled OR 0.59 (95% CI 0.37 to 0.94). Three RCTs reported death and severe disability as an outcome in this subgroup, and the pooled OR 0.67 (95% CI 0.46 to 0.98)., Authors' conclusions, This systematic review of randomised controlled trials of calcium channel blockers in acute traumatic head injury patients shows that considerable uncertainty remains over their effects. The effect of nimodipine in a subgroup of brain injury patients with subarachnoid haemorrhage shows a beneficial effect, though the increase in adverse reactions suffered by the intervention group may mean that the drug is harmful for some patients