Background, Intermittent claudication is pain, caused by chronic occlusive arterial disease, that develops in a limb during exercise and is relieved with rest. Buflomedil is a vasoactive agent used to treat peripheral vascular disease. However, its clinical efficacy for intermittent claudication has not yet been critically examined., Objectives, To evaluate the available evidence on the efficacy of buflomedil for intermittent claudication., Search strategy, We searched MEDLINE, International Pharmaceutical Abstracts (IPA), the trials register of the Cochrane Peripheral Vascular Diseases Review Group (searched November 2004), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL, Issue 4 2004) and Science Citation Index. Abbott Laboratories (buflomedil distributor), was asked to provide reports of controlled clinical trials. Reference lists of retrieved articles were checked and authors approached for additional trial information., Selection criteria, Double-blinded, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) in patients with intermittent claudication (Fontaine stage II) receiving oral buflomedil compared to placebo. Pain-free walking distance (PFWD) and maximum walking distance (MWD) were analysed by standardized exercise test., Data collection and analysis, Three eligible RCTs were found plus a meta-analysis referring to nine eligible trials. Two of these nine trials had already been identified; two had been published in non-indexed journals and five were unpublished. Only one of the five unpublished trials was provided by the author of the meta-analysis, the other four could not be retrieved. Four of the six eligible trials retrieved were subsequently excluded after quality evaluation., Walking distance data were extracted from the two remaining trials. Differences in incremental gain between active and placebo groups for PFWD and MWD with their confidence intervals were calculated., Main results, Both RCTs showed moderate improvements in PFWD for patients on buflomedil. In one trial this improvement was statistically significant (75 m; 95% CI 37 to 114); in the other, with a wholly diabetic population, it was non-significant (81 m; 95% CI 7 to 154) compared to placebo. For both RCTs the gains in MWD were statistically significant, but with wide confidence intervals (81 m; 95% CI 30 to 131 and 171 m; 95% CI 27 to 316, respectively)., Authors' conclusions, There is little evidence available to evaluate the efficacy of buflomedil for intermittent claudication. Most trials are of poor quality and were thus excluded. The two trials included showed moderately positive results but these are undermined by publication bias since we know of another four unpublished, irretrievable, and inconclusive studies