Background, Bone is the most common site of metastatic disease associated with breast cancer affecting more than half of women during the course of their disease. Bisphosphonates, which inhibit osteoclast-mediated bone resorption, are standard care for tumour-associated hypercalcaemia., Objectives, To assess the effect of bisphosphonates on skeletal events, bone pain, quality of life and survival in women with early and advanced breast cancer., Search strategy, We searched the Cochrane Breast Cancer Group trials register (20th December 2004), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (The Cochrane Library Issue 1, 2004), Medline, Embase, and reference lists of articles. We also contacted researchers in the field., Selection criteria, Randomised studies comparing bisphosphonates and placebo, or different bisphosphonates in women with metastatic breast cancer., Data collection and analysis, Two reviewers independently assessed trial and extracted data. Adverse effects information was collected from the trials., Main results, Twenty one randomised studies were included. In nine studies (2189 women with advanced breast cancer and existing bone metastases), bisphosphonates reduced the risk of developing a skeletal event by 17% (RR 0.83; 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.78 to 0.89; P < 0.00001). The bisphosphonate most effective in reducing the risk of developing a skeletal event by 41% was 4 mg IV zolendronate (RR 0.59, 95% CI 0.42-0.82)., Women with advanced breast cancer and clinically evident bone metastases treated with bisphosphonates showed significant delays in the median time to a skeletal event. Compared with placebo or no bisphosphonate, with bisphosphonates significant improvements in bone pain were reported in seven studies. Improvements in global quality of life were reported in only the three studies of iv and oral ibandronate., Treatment with bisphosphonates does not appear to affect survival in women with advanced breast cancer., In the three studies of bisphosphonates in 320 women with advanced breast cancer without clinically evident bone metastases, there was no significant reduction in the incidence of skeletal events (RR 0.99; 95% CI 0.67-1.47; P = 0.97)., Toxicity or adverse events were described in 18 of the 21 studies. In general, few serious adverse events were reported. Toxicity associated with bisphosphonates is generally mild and infrequent., Authors' conclusions, In women with advanced breast cancer and clinically evident bone metastases, the use of bisphosphonates (oral or intravenous) reduces the risk of developing a skeletal event and the skeletal event rate, as well as increasing the time to skeletal event. Some bisphosphonates may also reduce bone pain in women with advanced breast cancer and clinically evident bone metastases and may improve global quality of life. The optimal timing of initiation of bisphosphonate therapy and duration of treatment is uncertain