Background, Lymphoedema is a chronic, progressive condition and one area of debate is the optimum management for infective/inflammatory episodes (AIE's)., Objectives, To determine whether antibiotic/anti-inflammatory drugs given prophylactically reduce the number and severity of AIE's in patients with lymphoedema., Search strategy, We searched the Cochrane Breast Cancer Group register in September 2003, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (The Cochrane Library, Issue 4, 2003), CINAHL, MEDLINE, PASCAL, SIGLE, UnCover, reference lists produced by The British Lymphology Society, the National Research Register (NRR) and the International Society of Lymphology congress proceedings., Selection criteria, Randomised controlled trials testing an antibiotic or anti-inflammatory drug against placebo (with or without physical therapies) were included., Data collection and analysis, Eligibility for inclusion was confirmed by two blinded reviewers. The papers were screened independently using a checklist of criteria relating to quality. Both reviewers extracted data from the eligible studies using a data extraction form., Main results, Four studies (364 randomised patients) were included. Two studied the effects of intensive physical treatment plus selenium or placebo in preventing AIE's, and two studied the effects of Ivermectin, Diethylcarbamazine (DEC) (anti-filarial agents) and penicillin as prophylactic treatment for adeno lymphangitis(ADL) versus placebo., Both selenium trials reported no inflammatory episodes during the trial period in the treated group but one case of infection in the two placebo groups respectively. Seven additional cases of infection in trial one and 14 cases in trial two required treatment in the three month follow up period., One anti-filarial trial reported 127 ADL episodes for all groups during the treatment year (compared with 684 episodes during the pre-treatment year). There were 228 ADL episodes during the trial follow-up year but no findings were significant. No link was found between the grade of oedema and the frequency of ADL episodes. There was a significant link between increased episodes and the rainy season. Penicillin reduced the mean number of inflammatory episodes from 4.6 to 0.5 after treatment, which increased to 1.9 at the end of follow-up., Authors' conclusions, The effectiveness of selenium in preventing AIE in lymphoedema remains inconclusive in the absence of properly conducted randomised-controlled trials. Anti-filarials do not appear to reduce ADL episodes in filarial lymphoedema. Penicillin appears to contribute to a significant reduction in ADL when combined with foot-care. The importance of foot-care should be recommended, which may also apply to care of the arm following breast cancer treatment. Properly conducted trials are needed to demonstrate any efficacy of these interventions