Background, Urinary tract infections (UTI) are common in elderly patients. Authors of non systematic literature reviews often recommend longer treatment durations (7 to 14 days) for older women, but the scientific evidence for such recommendations is unclear., Objectives, To determine the optimal duration of antibiotic treatment for uncomplicated symptomatic lower UTI in elderly women., Search strategy, We contacted known investigators and pharmaceutical companies, screened reference lists of identified articles, reviews and books, and searched the following databases: MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, Healthstar, Popline, Gerolit, Bioethics Line, The Cochrane Library, Dissertation Abstracts International and Index to Scientific & Technical Proceedings without language restriction. Most recent search: 8 January 2004., Selection criteria, All randomized controlled trials comparing different treatment durations of oral antibiotics for uncomplicated symptomatic lower UTIs in elderly women were included. We excluded patients with fever, flank pain or complicating factors; trials with treatment durations longer than 14 days and prevention studies., Data collection and analysis, The two reviewers independently assessed trial quality and extracted data. Statistical analyses were performed using the random effects model and the results expressed as relative risk (RR) for dichotomous outcomes with 95% confidence intervals (CI)., Main results, Thirteen trials involving 1435 elderly women were included. Six trials compared single dose with short-course treatment, three compared single dose with long-course treatment and four compared short- with long-course treatment. Methodological quality of all trials was low. Persistent bacteriuria rate at short-term (2 weeks post-treatment) was better in the longer treatment group (3 to 14 days) than in the single dose group (RR 1.84, 95% CI 1.18 to 2.86). However, the rate of persistent bacteria at long-term and the clinical cure rate showed no statistically significant difference between the two groups. Patients preferred single dose treatment (RR 0.73, 95% CI 0.66 to 0.88), however this was based on one trial comparing different antibiotics. Short versus longer treatments showed no significant difference, but the number of included studies and sample size were low., Authors' conclusions, Single dose antibiotic treatment may be less effective but better accepted by patients than longer treatment durations (3 to 14 days). There was no significant difference between short versus longer course antibiotics. The methodological quality of included studies was poor and the optimal treatment duration could not be determined. More appropriately designed RCTs testing the effect - on clinical relevant outcomes - of different treatment durations of a given antibiotic in a strictly defined population of elderly women