Background, Poisoning with organophosphorus pesticides (OPs) is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in all parts of the world, particularly developing countries. The case-fatality ratio for pesticide intentional self-poisoning is around 10 to 20% even when the standard antidotes (atropine, oximes and benzodiazepines) are used. Alternative treatments have been trialled in an attempt to improve outcomes from acute OP poisoning, one of which is plasma alkalinisation. Animal and preliminary human research has suggested benefit from plasma alkalinisation with sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO(subscript 3)) as a treatment for acute OP poisoning., Objectives, To determine the efficacy of alkalinisation, in particular NaHCO(subscript 3), for the treatment of acute OP poisoning., Search strategy, We searched MEDLINE, EMBASE, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, Current Awareness in Clinical Toxicology, Info Trac, , and Science Citation Index of studies identified by the previous searches. We also manually reviewed the bibliographies of identified articles and personally contacted experts in the field. The searches were conducted in March 2004., Selection criteria, Randomised controlled trials and controlled clinical trials of symptomatic patients following acute OP poisoning treated with alkalinisation. The quality of studies and eligibility for inclusion was assessed using criteria by Jadad and Schulz., Data collection and analysis, Studies were identified and both authors independently extracted data which was recorded on a pre-designed form. Study design, including the method of randomisation, participant characteristics, type of intervention and outcomes were recorded. The Relative Risk (RR) for death and Weighted Mean Difference (WMD) for the total dose of atropine were determined., Main results, One small randomised controlled trial with alternating allocation was located. The RR of death in patients receiving NaHCO(subscript 3) compared to controls was 0.52 (95% CI 0.05 to 5.39) and the WMD for total dose of atropine was -36.1(95% CI -68.43 to -3.77). Four other studies were identified but none satisfied inclusion criteria; two studies were uncontrolled and two were historically controlled. NaHCO(subscript 3) was used in each study to induce alkalinisation. Marked heterogeneity between subjects and treatments was noted - for example, a different regimen of NaHCO(subscript 3) was used in each study., Authors' conclusions, Clinical studies suggest benefit from plasma alkalinisation with NaHCO(subscript 3) in OP poisoning, but there is insufficient evidence to support its routine use. Further research is required to determine the method of alkalinisation that will optimise outcomes, and the regimen which will produce the target arterial pH of 7.50 (range 7.45 to 7.55). This should be followed by a well-designed randomised controlled trial to determine efficacy