Daily prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ) significantly decreases morbidity and mortality among people living with HIV. Some clinicians are reluctant to use TMP-SMZ in pregnant and breastfeeding HIV-infected women because of concerns about the possible teratogenicity when used in the first trimester and about its potential to induce hyperbilirubinemia near term and during early breastfeeding. We systematically reviewed evidence regarding the toxicity of TMP-SMZ prophylaxis in pregnant and breastfeeding women to help guide practice in resource-limited settings. We identified relevant literature by searching PubMed and MEDLINE via OVID, Embase, and Science Citation Index for data on hyperbilirubinemia, kernicterus, and teratogenicity associated with administration of sulfonamides and TMP-SMZ through July 2005. We also reviewed the reference lists of identified articles. Most studies demonstrated that TMP-SMZ was not associated with hyperbilirubinemia when administered to mothers during pregnancy and breastfeeding. No cases of kernicterus were reported in neonates after maternal ingestion of sulfonamides. There is mixed evidence linking ingestion of TMP-SMZ and other sulfonamides in early pregnancy to elevated risks of oral clefts, neural tube defects, and cardiovascular and urinary tract abnormalities, although some sources found that supplementation with folic acid might ameliorate this potential risk. Existing guidelines recommend that HIV-infected pregnant women receive prophylaxis, but they differ with regards to stage of disease at which to initiate treatment, need for CD4+ T-lymphocyte testing, and prophylaxis during the first trimester. Existing data indicate that the risk of serious injury to neonates from maternal use of daily TMP-SMZ prophylaxis during pregnancy and breastfeeding is small. Given the substantial benefits of TMP-SMZ prophylaxis for HIV-infected women living in resource-limited settings, this review indicates that it is safe to abide by the WHO guidelines recommending daily TMP-SMZ prophylaxis for HIV-infected pregnant women. [References: 88]