BACKGROUND: Oxidative stress is prevalent in dialysis patients and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease and anaemia. We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to examine the effect of Excebrane, a vitamin E-coated cellulose-based dialyser, on circulating biomarkers of lipid peroxidation, as surrogate markers of oxidative stress. METHODS: The primary sources used to identify candidate studies included PubMed, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, a bibliography provided by the dialyser manufacturer, and a manual search of abstracts from proceedings of scientific meetings and review articles. Studies were selected for analysis if their design included a comparator group (primarily within patient comparison, i.e. pre- and post-study evaluations). For the meta-analysis, we computed the overall change of the outcome from baseline using a random-effects model. A supplemental analysis was performed in which the absolute levels of these biomarkers of lipid peroxidation were converted to a common unit by calculating standardized effect sizes. RESULTS: Fourteen peer-reviewed articles met the criteria. The studies consisted of 11 single arm, one randomized crossover and two randomized controlled trials, with a total of 37 to 158 evaluable patients, according to the outcome of interest analysed. Due to the paucity of randomized trials, the meta-analysis was limited to the Excebrane arm of each study. When the studies were combined according to similar measurement units, the overall mean decrease in malondialdehyde (MDA) level was -0.3 mM (95% CI, -0.5 to -0.1 mM; seven studies) and -0.8 nmol/mg low-density lipoprotein (LDL) (95% CI, -1.3 to -0.4 nmol/mg LDL; three studies), respectively. The summary estimate revealed a non-significant decrease in pre-dialysis thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) level of 0.4 microM (95% CI, -1.2 to 0.4 microM; three studies). When the MDA and TBARS studies were combined using the standardized effect size, the mean decrease in these biomarkers of lipid peroxidation was statistically significant at -1.7 units (95% CI, -2.7, -0.7 units; 13 studies). A meta-analysis on the effect of Excebrane on pre-dialysis levels of oxidized-LDL could not be performed due to study heterogeneity. CONCLUSION: The conversion of dialysis patients to a vitamin E-coated dialyser is associated with an improvement in circulating biomarkers of lipid peroxidation, which is of potential clinical benefit. [References: 61]