BACKGROUND: The first Italian proton therapy facility was realized in Catania, at the INFN-LNS. With its energy (62 MeV proton beam), it is ideal for the treatment of shallow tumors like those of the ocular region: uveal melanoma, first of all (the most common primary intraocular malignancy of adults) and other less frequent lesions like choroidal hemangioma, conjunctiva melanoma, and eyelid tumors. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The first patient was enrolled in February 2002, and to date 30 patients have been treated. All patients had a localized uveal melanoma, with no systemic metastases, and had specific indications for proton beam radiation therapy: lesions between 5-25 mm basal diameter, not exceeding 15 mm thickness, absence of total retinal detachment or glaucoma. According to the tumor dimensions, 2 patients had a small lesion or T1 (6%), 3 had a medium-sized lesion or T2 (10%), 14 had a large lesion or T3 (47%), and 11 had an extra-large lesion or T3 (37%); no patient had extrascleral invasion or T4 of the TNM-AJCC Staging System. In most cases, the tumor infiltrated only the choroid (14 patients, 47%) or the choroid plus the ciliary body (14 patients, 47%). We also treated a primitive iris melanoma, without diffusion to the ciliary body. The target volume was defined as the tumor plus a safety margin of 2.5 mm, laterally and antero-posteriorly; this margin was increased to 3 mm if ciliary body involvement was present. The treatment was carried out in 4 fractions on 4 consecutive days to a total dose of 54.5 Gy (single fraction 13.6 Gy), which corresponds to 60 CGE (Cobalt Gray Equivalent; single fraction 15 CGE), because the relative biological effectiveness is 1.1. RESULTS: The first follow-up is planned at 6-8 months after the end of the treatment, and our clinical end points are local control (defined as cessation of growth or tumor shrinkage), eye retention, and maintenance of a good visual function. At the time of this writing, we had preliminary results from 13 patients. Nine patients showed tumor shrinkage (69%), 3 a substantially stable dimension (23%), but almost all patients presented an increased ultrasound reflectivity (a surrogate for tumor control). DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS: The literature data show that charged particle therapy has allowed an optimal local control in the treatment of uveal melanomas (about 96% in the different series, superior to that obtained with plaquetherapy [between 83% and 92%]), a metastatic rate slightly better than enucleation reports, and a survival rate of almost 90% at 5 years. Our preliminary results show a tumor response in almost all cases, with no major acute or subacute side effects. We thus plan to continue with our treatment procedures and our dose prescription