An integrated treatment delivery system for conformal stereotactic radiosurgery (CSRS) and radiotherapy (CSRT) has been developed through a collaboration involving Siemens Medical Systems, Inc., Tyco/Radionics, Inc., and The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center. The system consists of a 6-MV linear accelerator (LINAC) equipped with a Tyco/Radionics miniature multileaf collimator (mMLC). For the conventional SRS treatment, the circular collimator housing can be attached to the opening window of the mMLC. The treatment delivery system is integrated with a radiotherapy treatment planning system and a record-and-verify system. The purpose of this study is to report the characteristics, performance, benefits, and the clinical applications of this delivery system. The technical specifications of the LINAC and mMLC were tested, and all the specifications were met. The 80% to 20% penumbral width for each mMLC leaf is approximately 3 mm and is nearly independent of the off-axis positions of a leaf. The maximum interleaf leakage is 1.4% (1.1% on average) and the maximum intra-leaf leakage is 1.0% (0.9% on average). The leaf position precision is better than 0.5 mm for all the leaves. The integration of the SRS/SRT treatment planning system, mMLC, and LINAC has been evaluated successfully for transferring the patient treatment data file through radiotherapy treatment planning system to the patient information and treatment record-and-verify server and the mMLC controller. Subsequently, the auto-sequential treatment delivery for SRS, CSRS/CSRT, and the step-and-shoot intensity-modulated radiotherapy has also been tested successfully. The accuracy of dose delivery was evaluated for a 2-cm spherical target in a Radiological Physics Center SRS head phantom with GAFChromic films and TLD. Five non-coplanar arcs, using a 2-cm diameter circular collimator, were used for this simulation treatment. The accuracy to aim the center of the spherical target was within 0.5 mm and the deviation of dose delivery to the isocenter of the target was within 2% of the calculated dose. For the irregularly shaped tumor, a tissue-equivalent head phantom was used to evaluate the accuracy of dose delivery for using either geometric conformal treatment or IMRT. The accuracy of dose delivery to the isocenter was within 2% and 3% of the calculated dose, respectively. From October 26, 1999 to September 30, 2002, we treated over 400 SRS patients and 70 SRT patients. Four representative cases are presented to illustrate the capabilities of this dedicated unit in performing conventional SRS, CSRS, and CSRT. For all the cases, the geometric conformal-plan dose distributions showed a high degree of conformity to the target shape. The degree of conformity can be evaluated using the target-volume-ratio (TVR). Our preferred TVR values for highly conformed dose distributions range from 1.6 to 2.0. The patient setup reproducibility for the Gill-Thomas-Cosman (GTC) noninvasive head frame ranges from 0.5 to 1 mm, and the head and neck noninvasive frame is within 2 mm. The integrated treatment delivery system offers excellent conformation for complicated planning target volumes with the stereotactic setup approach, ensuring that dose delivery can be achieved within the specified accuracy. In addition, the treatment time is comparable with that of single isocenter multiple-arc treatments. (c) 2003 American College of Medical Physics