Heavy ions are more efficient in producing complex-type chromosome exchanges than sparsely ionizing radiation, and this can potentially be used as a biomarker of radiation quality. We measured the induction of complex-type chromosomal aberrations in human peripheral blood lymphocytes exposed in vitro to accelerated H-, He-, C-, Ar-, Fe- and Au-ions in the LET range of approximately 0.4-1400 keV/micrometers. Chromosomes were analyzed either at the first post-irradiation mitosis, or in interphase, following premature condensation by phosphatase inhibitors. Selected chromosomes were then visualized after FISH-painting. The dose-response curve for the induction of complex-type exchanges by heavy ions was linear in the dose-range 0.2-1.5 Gy, while gamma-rays did not produce a significant increase in the yield of complex rearrangements in this dose range. The yield of complex aberrations after 1 Gy of heavy ions increased up to an LET around 100 keV/micrometers, and then declined at higher LET values. When mitotic cells were analyzed, the frequency of complex rearrangements after 1 Gy was about 10 times higher for Ar- or Fe- ions (the most effective ions, with LET around 100 keV/micrometers) than for 250 MeV protons, and values were about 35 times higher in prematurely condensed chromosomes. These results suggest that complex rearrangements may be detected in astronauts' blood lymphocytes after long-term space flight, because crews are exposed to HZE particles from galactic cosmic radiation. However, in a cytogenetic study of ten astronauts after long-term missions on the Mir or International Space Station, we found a very low frequency of complex rearrangements, and a significant post-flight increase was detected in only one out of the ten crewmembers. It appears that the use of complex-type exchanges as biomarker of radiation quality in vivo after low-dose chronic exposure in mixed radiation fields is hampered by statistical uncertainties. c2003 COSPAR. Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved