CONTEXT: The "Standards, Options and Recommendations" (SOR) project, which started in 1993, is a collaboration between the Federation of French Cancer Centers (FNCLCC), the 20 French Regional Cancer Centers. and specialists from French public universities,general hospitals and private clinics. The main objective is the development of clinical practice guidelines to improve the quality of health care and the outcome of cancer patients. OBJECTIVES: To update clinical practice guidelines for the management of patients with salivary gland malignant tumors previously validated in 1997. These recommendations cover diagnosis, treatment and follow-up of patients with these tumors. METHODS: The methodology is based on a literature review and critical appraisal by a multidisciplinary group of experts who define the CPGs according to the definitions of the Standards, Options and Recommendations project. Once the guidelines have been defined, the document is submitted for review by independent reviewers. RESULTS: This article presents the updated clinical practice guidelines concerning irradiation of patient with salivary gland tumors. The main recommendations are: 3 dimensional conformal radiotherapy (with or without intensity modulation) or 2D irradiation can be used; for surgical complete resected patients, postoperative photon radiotherapy should not be used in case of low grade stage I and 11 tumors(standard, level of evidence B2) but should be used for high grade stage II, II and IV tumors and for low grade stage III and IV tumors(standard, level of evidence B2). Neutron therapy should not be used in all of these cases (standard, level of evidence D); for patients presenting an incomplete macroscopic or microscopic surgical residual disease, postoperative irradiation must be delivered(standard). Neutron or photon therapy can be either delivered (options); for non operable patients neutron or photon therapy can be either delivered (options, level of evidence B2); for unresectable tumors or in case of recurrent neoplasms, exclusive neutron therapy or surgical tumor reduction combined with postoperative photon beam irradiation can be proposed (options, level of evidence C). [References: 74]