PURPOSE: Brain metabolism after surgery and postoperative radiotherapy (pRT) because of primary brain tumors was assessed by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy ((1)H-MRS) in vivo. The study was designed to reveal the impact of pRT on normal brain tissue metabolism, which may potentially help in delineating the target volumes for reirradiated patients. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Spectra of 43 patients ages 16-63 years treated with pRT for primary glial tumors in the Center of Oncology Maria Curie Memorial Institute Branch in Gliwice were analyzed. The control group consisted of spectra acquired for 30 healthy volunteers. All patients were treated with 3D conformal techniques using 6-20 MV photons to total doses of 60 Gy. Spectra were acquired from the control region before pRT and from three uninvolved regions 9-12 months after the end of pRT. Voxels were located in the region of low (<6 Gy), medium (29-39 Gy), and high radiation dose ( approximately 60 Gy). Relative intensities of the signals relating to N-acetyl-aspartate (NAA), choline-based compounds, creatine and phosphocreatine (Cr), mio-Inositol, lactate, and lipids were obtained. RESULTS: The spectra of "normal brain" taken 9 months after pRT are significantly different from those obtained for control volunteers and from the spectra acquired before radiotherapy. The lactate and lipids signals are very strong; however, they are not correlated with absorbed dose. NAA/Cr ratios are significantly lower than before radiotherapy even for the low-dose regions. Differences increase with radiation dose: the NAA/Cr ratio is significantly lower for the regions of brain receiving a high dose of radiation than for the low-dose areas. CONCLUSION: Combined treatment of primary brain tumors (surgery + postoperative radiotherapy) causes alteration of brain metabolism, even in regions of the brain far from the postoperative tumor bed and receiving relatively low total doses of radiation. Single voxel MRS spectroscopy in vivo cannot help in delineating target volumes for secondary irradiation