Purpose- There is a relationship between the local control rate of the nasopharyngeal cancer and the total dose delivered within the tumoral volume. In contrast, the relation between the dose and the irradiated volume and the risk of complication is not clearly defined. That is why, in patients presenting with a locally advanced nasopharyngeal cancer, we compared the dose-volume distribution of irradiated tissues, obtained from two 3D conformal irradiation techniques.Patients and methods- Between January 2000 and June 2001, 5 patients, 3 males and 2 females, with a median age of 32 years and presenting with a T4N0M0 nasopharyngeal cancer received a chemoradiotherapy. Radiotherapy combined photons and protons beams and the platin-based chemotherapy was delivered in three intravenous injections at d1, 22, 43 of the irradiation. To calculate the dosimetry, a CT scan and a MRI were performed in all the patients. The gross tumor volume (GTV) was delineated from the imagery, three clinical tumor volumes were defined, the CTV1 was the GTV and the whole nasopharynx, the CTV2 was the CTV plus a 10 mm-margin and the CTV3 was the CTV2 and the nodes areas (cervical and subclavicular). Prophylactic dose within node areas was 44 Gy. Prescribed doses within CTV2 and GTV or CTV1 were 54 Gy/CGE (Cobalt Gy Equivalent, for an EBR = 1,1) and 70 Gy/CGE, respectively. Irradiation was delivered with fractions of 1.8 or 2.0 Gy/CGE, with 44 Gy or 54 Gy by photons and with 16 or 26 CGE by protons. According to dose-volume histograms obtained from the dosimetry planning by protons and photons and from the theoretical dosimetry by photons lonely, for the different volumes of interest, GTV, CTV2, and organs at risk (optic nerves, chiasm, internal ears, brainstem, temporal lobes), we compared the averages of the maximum, minimum and mean doses and the averages of the volumes of organs of interest encompassed by different isodoses.Results- Calculated averages of minimum, maximum and mean doses delivered within GTV were superior for the treatment with combined photons and protons than with photons alone. The average GTV encompassed by the 70 Gy/CGE isodose was larger by 65% with the association compared to photons alone. The conformation ratio (tissue volume encompassed by the 95% isodose/GTV encompassed by the 95% isodose) was 3.1 with the association compared to 5.7 with photons alone. For the CTV2, there were no differences in different criteria according to the both irradiation techniques. For the critical, radiosensitive organs, the comparison of the majority of the criteria was in favour of the association of protons and photons. Overall, 78% of the criteria were in favour of the association.Conclusion- For locally advanced nasopharyngeal cancer without clinical adenopathy, irradiation by photons and protons increases the tumor volume irradiated at the prescribed dose and decreases the volume or critical organs irradiated and the total dose delivered within them