PURPOSE: The relative biological effectiveness (RBE) for inactivation of V79 cells was determined as function of dose at the Heidelberg 14-MeV (d + T) neutron therapy facility after irradiation with single doses in air and at different depths in a therapy phantom. Furthermore, to assess the reproducibility of RBE determinations in different experiments we examined the relationship between the interexperimental variation in radiosensitivity towards neutrons with that towards low LET 60Co photons. METHODS: Clonogenic survival of V79 cells was determined using the colony formation assay. The cells were irradiated in suspension in small volumes (1.2 ml) free in air or at defined positions in the perspex phantom. Neutron doses were in the range, Dt = 0.5-4 Gy. 60Co photons were used as reference radiation. RESULTS: The radiosensitivity towards neutrons varied considerably less between individual experiments than that towards photons and also less than RBE. However, the mean sensitivity of different series was relatively constant. RBE increased with decreasing dose per fraction from RBE = 2.3 at 4 Gy to RBE = 3.1 at 0.5 Gy. No significant difference in RBE could be detected between irradiation at 1.6 cm and 9.4 cm depth in the phantom. However, an approximately 20% higher RBE was found for irradiation free in air compared with inside the phantom. Combining the two effects, irradiation with 0.5 Gy free in air yielded an approximately 40% higher RBE than a dose of 2 Gy inside the phantom. CONCLUSION: The measured values of RBE as function of dose per fraction within the phantom is consistent with the energy of the neutron beam. The increased RBE free in air, however, is greater than expected from microdosimetric parameters of the beam and may be due to slow recoil protons produced by interaction of multiply scattered neutrons or to an increased contribution of alpha particles from C(n, alpha) reactions near the surface. An enhanced RBE in subcutaneous layers of skin combined with an increase in RBE at low doses per fraction outside the target volume could potentially have significant consequences for normal tissue reactions in radiotherapy patients treated with fast neutrons