The number of linac monitor units (MU) from intensity modulated sequential tomotherapy (IMST) is substantially larger than the MU delivered in conventional radiation therapy, and the relation between MU and dose is obscure due to complicated variation of the beam intensities. The purpose of this work was to develop a practical method of verifying the MU and dose from IMST so that the MU of each arced beam could be double-checked for accuracy. MU calculations for 41 arced beams from 14 IMST patients were performed using the variables of vane open fraction time, field size, target depth, output factor, TMR, and derived intensity distribution. Discrepancy between planned and checked MU was quantified as 100 (MU(cal)-MU(plan))/MU(plan) percent. All 41 discrepancies were clustered between -5% to +4%, illustrated in a Gaussian-shaped histogram centered at -1.0+/-3.5% standard deviation indicating the present MU calculations are in agreement with the planned expectations. To confirm the correctness of the present calculated MUs of the IMST plans, eight of the calculated IMST plans are performed dose verifications using their hybrid plans, which are created by transporting patient's IMST plan beams onto a spherical polystyrene Phantom for dose distribution within the Phantom. The dose was measured with a 0.07 cc ionization chamber inserted in the spherical Phantom during the hybrid plan irradiation. Average discrepancy between planned and measured doses was found to be 0.6+/-3.4% with single standard deviation uncertainty. The spread of the discrepancies of present calculated MUs relative to their planned ones are attributed to uncertainties of effective field size, effective planned dose corresponding to each arc, and inaccuracy of quantification of scattered dose from adjacent arced beams. Overall, the present calculation of MUs is consistent with what derived from treatment plans. Since the MUs are verified by actual dose measurements, therefore the present MU calculation technique is considered adequate for double-checking planned IMST MUs