Dose assessment to active bone marrow is a critical feature of radionuclide therapy treatment planning. Skeletal dosimetry models currently used to assign radionuclide S values for clinical marrow dose assessment are based on bone and marrow cavity chord-length distributions. Accordingly, these models cannot explicitly consider energy loss to inactive marrow (adipose tissue) during particle transport across the trabecular marrow space (TMS). One method to account for this energy loss is to uniformly scale the resulting TMS absorbed fractions by reference values of site-specific marrow cellularity. In doing so, however, the resulting absorbed fractions for self-irradiation of the trabecular active marrow (TAM) do not converge to unity at low electron source energies. This study attempts to address this issue by using nuclear magnetic resonance microscopy images of trabecular bone to define 3-dimensional (3D) dosimetric models in which explicit spatial distributions of adipose tissue are introduced. METHODS: Cadaveric sources of trabecular bone were taken from both the femoral heads and humeral epiphyses of a 51-y-old male subject. The bone sites were sectioned and subsequently imaged at a proton resonance frequency of 200 MHz (4.7 T) using a 3D spin-echo pulse sequence. After image segmentation, voxel clusters of adipocytes were inserted interior to the marrow cavities of the binary images, which were then coupled to the EGS4 radiation transport code for simulation of active marrow electron sources. RESULTS: Absorbed fractions for self-irradiation of the TAM were tabulated for both skeletal sites. Substantial variations in the absorbed fraction to active marrow are seen with changes in marrow cellularity, particularly in the energy range of 100-500 keV. These variations are seen to be more dramatic in the humeral epiphysis (larger marrow volume fraction) than in the femoral head. CONCLUSION: Results from electron transport in 3D models of the trabecular skeleton indicate that current methods to account for marrow cellularity in chord-based models are incomplete. At 10 keV, for example, the Eckerman and Stabin model underestimates the self-absorbed fraction to active marrow by 75%. At 1 MeV, the model of Bouchet et al. overestimates this same value by 40%. In the energy range of 20-200 keV, neither model accurately predicts energy loss to the active bone marrow. Thus, it is proposed that future extensions of skeletal dosimetry models use 3D transport techniques in which explicit delineation of active and inactive marrow is feasible