OBJECT: The management of chordomas involving the skull base continues to present a number of treatment-related problems. Recently, both radical resection and charged-particle irradiation or stereotactic radiosurgery have reportedly been found effective for tumor control and for promoting a better quality of life in patients. In this article the authors analyzed the outcomes in 17 patients with skull base chordomas who were surgically treated at Kobe University Hospital between 1972 and 2000. METHODS: Preoperative radiological examinations included magnetic resonance imaging, computerized tomography, angiography, and balloon occlusion test of the internal carotid artery. Among the various surgical approaches used to remove the tumor were the frontoorbitozygomatic, transmaxillary, transcondylar, transsphenoidal, and the transbasal. Total removal was achieved in two (12%), near-total removal in three (18%), subtotal removal in nine (52%), and partial removal in three patients (18%). Since 1990, chordomas have been radically resected via various skull base approaches; the combined total or near-total removal rate has been 80% in this period. Radical removal of the tumors has not led to an increased risk. At the final follow-up review (mean 59.5 month), 75% of the patients were still alive, and 25% had died of chordoma recurrence. The overall recurrence-free survival rate was 82% at 3 years and 51% at 5 years. The 5-year recurrence-free survival rate in the five patients who underwent the operation during the past decade was 77% (mean follow up of 5.2 years). In two patients with recurrent tumors who underwent radiosurgery, no evidence of tumor regrowth was demonstrated at 3 years posttreatment. CONCLUSIONS: The authors suggest that for the treatment of skull base chordomas radical resection is a key factor for longer survival and improved quality of life. Patients with sufficiently small tumors, which show a favorable configuration and location, can be suitable candidates for stereotactic radiosurgery