PURPOSE: To assess local control, survival and complications in patients with cervical carcinoma Stage IIB treated radically with transperineal Iridium-192 low-dose rate interstitial brachytherapy following external beam radiotherapy. PATIENTS AND METHODS: 65 women (age 25-70 years, mean 47 years) with cervical carcinoma Stage IIB were initially treated with external beam radiotherapy on a telecobalt or 6 MV linear accelerator to a dose of 50 Gy delivered in 5-6 weeks. After 2-3 weeks of completing external radiation, patients received interstitial brachytherapy with Iridium-192 (activity 0.5-1 mCi/cm) using a Syed-Neblett perineal template. The median dose delivered to the implant volume was 24 Gy (range 20-32 Gy) delivered at an average dose rate of 0.70 Gy/h (range 0.40-1.20 Gy/h). A point defined at 1.5 cm lateral to the central uterine tandem at the level of os was taken as a representative for assessing the dose to the cervix. Mean doses delivered by interstitial brachytherapy to point A, cervix, point B and rectum were 38 Gy, 34 Gy, 16 Gy and 16 Gy, respectively. RESULTS: At a median follow-up of 53 months, the actuarial disease free survival and overall survival for 65 patients at both 5 and 10 years was 64% and 44%, respectively. Response to radiotherapy was a strong predictor of local control with 82% of patients continuing to have pelvic control after initial complete response. Overall, nine (14%) patients had persistent disease, ten (15%) developed a central recurrence after initial control and three patients developed distant metastasis on follow-up. No patient had any immediate treatment-related complication. Late toxicity included grade I-II rectal reactions in five patients and grade IV bladder complication (vesico-vaginal fistula) in two patients. 5 years after treatment, one patient developed intestinal obstruction, which was relieved after conservative management. Two patients developed vaginal stenosis. The 5- and 10-year disease free survival was 48% in patients aged less than 45 years as compared to 80% in patients of more than 45 years (p = 0.009). Dose to the cervical point was a prognostic indicator with 5- and 10-year disease free survival of 47% in patients who received < 35 Gy in comparison to 80% in patients who had > 35 Gy (p = 0.03). There was no difference in local control and survival in patients with minimal and moderate parametrial involvement. Bulky disease (> 4 cm) at presentation and a longer gap between external radiation and brachytherapy showed a trend towards inferior local control. CONCLUSIONS: Interstitial brachytherapy after external beam irradiation in patients with cervical carcinoma Stage IIB results in acceptable local control, survival and complication rates. Increased dose to the cervical disease results in improved local control and survival and should therefore be considered while optimizing brachytherapy treatment plans. Comparison of the results with those of standard intracavitary therapy remains to be proven in a randomized trial