The clinical implementation and application of a novel treatment planning system (TPS) for scanned ion beams is described, which is in clinical use for carbon ion treatments at the German heavy ion facility (GSI). All treatment plans are evaluated on the basis of biologically effective dose distributions. For therapy control, in-beam positron emission tomography (PET) and an online monitoring system for the beam intensity and position are used. The absence of a gantry restricts the treatment plans to horizontal beams. Most of the treatment plans consist of two nearly opposing lateral fields or sometimes orthogonal fields. In only a very few cases a single beam was used. For patients with very complex target volumes lateral and even distal field patching techniques were applied. Additional improvements can be achieved when the patient's head is fixed in a tilted position, in order to achieve sparing of the organs at risk. In order to test the stability of dose distributions in the case of patient misalignments we routinely simulate the effects of misalignments for patients with critical structures next to the target volume. The uncertainties in the range calculation are taken into account by a margin around the target volume of typically 2-3 mm, which can, however, be extended if the simulation demonstrates larger deviations. The novel TPS developed for scanned ion beams was introduced into clinical routine in December 1997 and was used for the treatment planning of 63 patients with head and neck tumours until July 2000. Planning strategies and methods were developed for this tumour location that facilitate the treatment of a larger number of patients with the scanned heavy ion beam in a clinical setting. Further developments aim towards a simultaneous optimization of the treatment field intensities and more effective procedures for the patient set-up. The results demonstrate that ion beams can be integrated into a clinical environment for treatment planning and delivery