PURPOSE: Micromultileaf collimators (mMLC) have recently been introduced to conform photon beams in stereotactic irradiation of brain lesions. Proton beams and stereotactic conformal radiotherapy (SCRT) can be used to tailor the dose to nonspherical targets, as most tumors of the brain are irregularly shaped. Comparative planning of brain lesions using either proton or stereotactically guided photon beams was done to assess the institution's clinically available modality for three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy. METHODS AND MATERIALS: For the photon treatment, multiple stereotactically guided uniform intensity beams from a linear accelerator were used, each conformed to a projection of the planning target volume (PTV) by a mMLC. Proton beams were delivered from an isocentrically mounted gantry, using the spot-scanning technique and energy modulation. Seven patients were scanned in a stereotactic frame; target volumes and organs at risk (OAR) were delineated with the help of MR images. Four different lesions were selected: (1) concave, (2) ellipsoid isolated, (3) superficial and close to an organ at risk, and (4) irregular complex. Dose distributions in the PTV and critical structures were calculated using three-dimensional treatment-planning systems, followed by both a quantitative (by dose--volume histogram and conformity index) and qualitative (visual inspection) assessment of the plans. RESULTS: A high degree of conformation was achieved with a mMLC and stereotactic uniform intensity beams with comparable conformity indices to protons for 5 out of 7 plans, especially for superficial or spherical lesions. In the cases studied, the conformity index was better for protons than for photons for complex or concave lesions, or when the PTV was in the neighborhood of critical structures. CONCLUSION: The results for the cases studied, show that for simple geometries or for superficial lesions, there is no advantage in using protons. However, for complex PTV shapes, or when the PTV is in the vicinity of critical structures, protons seem to be potentially better than the fixed-field photon technique