A new technique for intensity-modulated beam (IMB) delivery that combines the features of intensity modulated arc therapy (IMAT) with the use of 'classical blocks' is proposed. The role of the blocks is to realize the high-gradient modulation of the intensity profile corresponding to the region to be protected within the body contour, while the MLC leaves or the secondary collimator defines the rest of the field and delivers intensity-modulated multiple rotational segments. The centrally blocked radiation fields are applied sequentially, in several rotations. Each rotation of the gantry is responsible for delivering one segment of the optimal intensity profile. The new IMAT technique is applied for a treatment geometry represented by an annular target volume centrally located within a circular body contour. The annulus encompasses a circular critical structure, which is to be protected. The beam opening and corresponding weight of each segment are determined in two ways. The first method applies a linear optimization algorithm to precalculated centrally blocked radial dose profiles. These radial profiles are calculated for a set of beam openings, ranging from the largest field that covers the whole planning target volume (PTV) to the smallest, which is 1 cm larger than the width of the central block. The optimization is subjected to dose homogeneity constraints imposed on a linear combination of these profiles and finally delivers the dimensions and weights of the rotational beams to be used in combination. The second method decomposes into several subfields the fluence profile of a rotational beam known to deliver a constant dose level to PTV. This fluence profile is determined by using the analytical method proposed by Brahme for the case of the annular PTV and the concentric organ at risk (OAR). The proper segmentation of this intensity profile provides the field sizes and corresponding weights of the subfields to be used in combination. Both methods show that for this particular treatment geometry, three to seven segments are sufficient to cover the PTV with the 95% dose level and to keep the dose level to the central critical structure under 30% of the maximum dose. These results were verified by experimentally delivering the calculated segments to radiotherapy verification films sandwiched between two cylindrical pieces of a pressed-wood phantom. The total beam time for a three-field irradiation was 77 s. The predicted and experimental dose profiles along the radius of the phantom agreed to within 5%. Generalization of this technique to real-patient treatment geometry and advantages over other conformal radiotherapy techniques are also discussed