PURPOSE: Infrared light-emitting diodes (IRLEDs) have been used for optic-guided stereotactic radiotherapy localization at the University of Florida since 1995. The current paradigm requires stereotactic head ring placement for the patient's first fraction. The stereotactic coordinates and treatment plan are determined relative to this head ring. The IRLEDs are attached to the patient via a maxillary bite plate, and the position of the IRLEDs relative to linac isocenter is saved to file. These positions are then recalled for each subsequent treatment to position the patient for fractionated therapy. The purpose of this article was to report a method of predicting the desired IRLED locations without need for the invasive head ring. METHODS AND MATERIALS: To achieve the goal of frameless optic-guided radiotherapy, a method is required for direct localization of the IRLED positions from a CT scan. Because it is difficult to localize the exact point of light emission from a CT scan of an IRLED, a new bite plate was designed that contains eight aluminum fiducial markers along with the six IRLEDs. After a calibration procedure to establish the spatial relationship of the IRLEDs to the aluminum fiducial markers, the stereotactic coordinates of the IRLED light emission points are determined by localizing the aluminum fiducial markers in a stereotactic CT scan. RESULTS: To test the accuracy of direct CT determination of the IRLED positions, phantom tests were performed. The average accuracy of isocenter localization using the IRLED bite plate was 0.65 +/- 0. 17 mm for these phantom tests. In addition, the optic-guided system has a unique compatibility with the stereotactic head ring. Therefore, the isocentric localization capability was clinically tested using the stereotactic head ring as the absolute standard. The ongoing clinical trial has shown the frameless system to provide a patient localization accuracy of 1.11 +/- 0.3 mm compared with the head ring. CONCLUSION: Optic-guided radiotherapy using IRLEDs provides a mechanism through which setup accuracy may be improved over conventional techniques. To date, this optic-guided therapy has been used only as a hybrid system that requires use of the stereotactic head ring for the first fraction. This has limited its use in the routine clinical setting. Computation of the desired IRLED positions eliminates the need for the invasive head ring for the first fraction. This allows application of optic-guided therapy to a larger cohort of patients, and also facilitates the initiation of extracranial optic-guided radiotherapy