Post-surgical radiation therapy is a routine procedure in the treatment of primary malignant brain tumors. Along with modest therapeutic effects conventional fractionated radiotherapy, in spite of any modifications, produces damage to non-malignant brain tissues lying within the treatment volume, the extent of which depends on radiation dose. Serial 1H-MRS allows non-invasive investigation of tissue metabolic profiles. In the present study the ratios of resonance signals assigned to the major 1H-MRS-visible metabolites (N-acetylaspartate, choline, creatine, inositol, lactate and lipid methylene group) were evaluated before, during and after post-surgical fractionated radiotherapy in brain regions close to and more distant from the tumor bed, receiving different radiation exposures (60 and < 40 Gy, respectively). The study group consisted of ten patients (aged 28-51). A MRI/MRS system (Elscint 2T Prestige) operating at the field strength of 2 T and the proton resonance frequency of 81.3 MHz has been used and the 1H-MR spectra were acquired using single voxel double-spin-echo PRESS sequence with a short TE. The spectra were post-processed with automatic fitting in the frequency domain. It was found that although the metabolite profiles depend on the dose obtained, but other stress factors (like surgery) seem to contribute to the overall picture of the metabolic status of the brain as well. In studies of early irradiation injuries, an increase of choline related ratios may serve rather as cell proliferation indictors than as cell injury ones, whereas the mI/Cr ratio appears as one of the first indicators of local irradiation injury. In order to establish the prognostic marker for early radiation damage, however, it seems necessary to analyze all visible metabolites as well. None of the metabolites separately may serve as such an indicator due to the complexity of tissue metabolism. Interestingly, MRI reveals no changes during the therapy process, whereas the metabolite ratios are being affected in the course of time, thus supporting the presumption that the 1H-MRS is a valuable method of radiation therapy monitoring