PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to examine the potential benefit of proton therapy for abdominal tumors. Extensive comparative planning was conducted investigating the most up-to-date photon and proton irradiation technologies. METHODS AND MATERIALS: A number of rival plans were generated for four patients: two inoperable pancreatic tumors, one inoperable and one postoperative biliary duct tumor. The dose prescription goal for these large targets was 50 Gy, followed by a boost dose up to 20 Gy to a smaller planning target volume (PTV). Photon plans were developed using "forward" planning of coplanar and noncoplanar conformal fields and "inverse" planning of intensity-modulated (IM) fields. Proton planning was simulated as administered using the so called spot-scanning technique. Plans were evaluated on the basis of normal tissues' dose-volume constraints (Emami B, Lyman J, Brown A, et al. Tolerance of normal tissue to therapeutic irradiation. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 1990;21:109-122) and coverage of treatment volumes with prescribed doses. RESULTS: For all cases, none of the forward calculated photon plans was able to deliver 50 Gy to large PTVs at the same time respecting the dose-volume constraints on all critical organs. Nine evenly spaced IM fields achieved or nearly achieved all maximum dose constraints to critical structures for two out of three inoperable patients. IM plans also obtained good results for the postoperative patient, even though the dose to the liver was very close to the maximum allowed. In all cases, photon irradiation of large PTV1s to 50 Gy followed by a 20 Gy boost entailed a risk very close to or higher than 5% for serious complications to the kidneys, liver, or bowel. Simple arrangements of 2, 3, and 4 proton fields obtained better dose conformation to the target, allowing the delivery of planned doses including the boost to all patients, without excessive risk of morbidity. Dose homogeneity inside the targets was also superior with protons. CONCLUSION: For the irradiation of large PTVs located in the abdominal cavity, where multiple, parallel structured organs surround the target volumes, proton therapy, delivered with a sophisticated isocentric technique, has the potential to achieve superior dose distributions compared with state-of-the-art photon irradiation techniques. IM photon plans obtain better results in the postoperative case, because the reduced volume lessens the effect of the unavoidable increase of integral dose to surrounding tissues