PURPOSE: The purpose of this investigation is to delineate the risk factors in the development of neovascular glaucoma (NVG) after helium-ion irradiation of uveal melanoma patients and to propose treatment technique that may reduce this risk. METHODS AND MATERIALS: 347 uveal melanoma patients were treated with helium-ions using a single-port treatment technique. Using univariate and multivariate statistics, the NVG complication rate was analyzed according to the percent of anterior chamber in the radiation field, tumor size, tumor location, sex, age, dose, and other risk factors. Several University of California San Francisco-Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL) patients in each size category (medium, large, and extralarge) were retrospectively replanned using two ports instead of a single port. By using appropriate polar and azimuthal gaze angles or by treating patients with two ports, the maximum dose to the anterior segment of the eye can often be reduced. Although a larger volume of anterior chamber may receive a lower dose by using two ports than a single port treatment. We hypothesize that this could reduce the level of complications that result from the irradiation of the anterior chamber of the eye. Dose-volume histograms were calculated for the lens, and compared for the single and two-port techniques. RESULTS: NVG developed in 121 (35%) patients. The risk of NVG peaked between 1 and 2.5 years posttreatment. By univariate and multivariate analysis, the percent of lens in the field was strongly correlated with the development of NVG. Other contributing factors were tumor height, history of diabetes, and vitreous hemorrhage. Dose-volume histogram analysis of single-port vs. two-port techniques demonstrate that for some patients in the medium and large category tumor groups, a significant decrease in dose to the structures in the anterior segment of the eye could have been achieved with the use of two ports. CONCLUSION: The development of NVG after helium-ion irradiation is correlated to the amount of lens, anterior chamber in the treatment field, tumor height, proximity to the fovea, history of diabetes, and the development of vitreous hemorrhage. Although the influence of the higher LET deposition of helium-ions is unclear, this study suggests that by reducing the dose to the anterior segment of the eye may reduce the NVG complications. Based on this retrospective analysis of LBNL patients, we have implemented techniques to reduce the amount of the anterior segment receiving a high dose in our new series of patients treated with protons using the cyclotron at the UC Davis Crocker Nuclear Laboratory (CNL)