A small, lightweight, single-focusing magnetic spectrometer was designed, assembled, and tested for analysis of electron beams from radiotherapy electron linacs. The objective was to develop a low cost, simple device that could be easily replicated in other medical centers, and to demonstrate the practicality of individual electron counting for precise analysis of electron spectra. Two methods of spectroscopy have been developed. One method consists of counting electrons individually as a function of magnetic field setting. Electrons are deflected through 90 degrees in the magnetic spectrometer, through an exit slit, and into a scintillation detector. A second method consists of recording the complete spectrum of electron energies from the accelerator on a strip of film at a single magnetic field setting. A critical design element is the 10-cm long collimator for electrons entering the magnet gap, with defining apertures and scraper slits. The spectrometer's cleanliness of transmission, energy calibration, and resolution were all tested at 10 and 16 MeV using the nearly monoenergetic electron beam of the accelerator at the National Research Council of Canada (NRCC). These accelerator tests, and also Monte Carlo trajectory simulations, both show that contamination of the transmitted spectrum due to scattered or knock-on electrons is negligible. Low-energy characteristics were tested using a 90Sr + 90Y beta-particle source. The energy calibration of the 90 degree spectrometer mode was based on mapping the magnetic field and also electron trajectory computer simulations. That calibration agrees with the NRCC's own calibrated scale to 0.8% for the single-particle counting method and to 1.3% for the film method. The energy resolution was measured to be 2% at 10 MeV, which is adequate for radiotherapy linac measurements. The acceptance half angle is 0.5 degrees or less, depending on the aperture size, which is adequate for electron angular distribution measurements within the forward cone of the electron beam. Used with film, the spectrometer is a simple, accurate, and highly transportable device for measuring radiotherapy electron energy spectra