The measurement of linear accelerator workload in radiation oncology departments is usually based on the number of fields treated per unit time. However, this approach ignores variations in treatment complexity. This prospective study, was designed to measure treatment workload directly, taking into account the variations in complexity of different treatment techniques. From this, a model was to be developed, which would be simple to apply and reproducible, both within and between radiation oncology departments in Australasia. It would provide a realistic basis for assessing treatment costs and enable the comparison of patient throughput between departments. This paper describes the derivation of the model. Over a 4-week period in the Radiation Oncology Department of Westmead Hospital, all fractions of radiotherapy were timed. The data collected included: tumour site; treatment intent; number of fields; number of wedges, compensators and shielding blocks; fraction number; patient age; performance status; and need for general anaesthesia. Multivariate modelling was performed to identify factors that significantly affected fraction duration, so that these could be used to develop a model of resource utilization. The durations of 2371 fractions were measured in 219 patients. Seventy-five per cent of fractions were given with radical intent. The factors found to influence fraction duration on multivariate modelling were: number of fields; number of shielding blocks; first treatment fraction; need for anaesthesia; and performance status. The number of wedges and compensators were also found to be significant but were not included in the model in order to maintain simplicity. This was felt to be necessary if the model is to be applied to the widest possible variety of machines. A model of resources utilization called 'Basic Treatment Equivalent' (BTE) was derived, which incorporated these factors. When tested at Westmead Hospital, this model accurately reflected the predicted BTE value over a further 1-week study period. This model of linear accelerator use, which incorporates complexity has been derived and evaluated in one radiation oncology department. This requires further prospective testing before its widespread use. The model appears to reflect linear accelerator workload better than previous measures. An Australasian study to validate the model further will be undertaken. If adopted, this model has implications for comparative workload reports, diagnostic-related groups, waiting list calculations, and patient scheduling