Late effects from the exposure to low doses of ionizing radiation are hardly or not at all observed in man probably due to the low values of risk coefficients that preclude statistical analyses of data from populations that are exposed to doses less than 0.2 Gy. In order to arrive at an assessment of potential risk from radiation exposure in the low dose range, the microdosimetry approach is essential. In the low dose range, ionizing radiation generates particle tracks, mainly electrons, which are distributed rather heterogenously within the exposed tissue. Taking the individual cell as the elemental unit of life, observations and calculations of cellular responses to being hit by energy deposition events from low LET type are analysed. It emerges that besides the probability of a hit cell to sustain a detrimental effect with the consequence of malignant transformation there are probabilities of various adaptive responses that equip the hit cell with a benefit. On the one hand, an improvement of cellular radical detoxification was observed in mouse bone marrow cells; another adaptive response pertaining to improved DNA repair, was reported for human lymphocytes. The improved radical detoxification in mouse bone marrow cells lasts for a period of 5-10 hours and improved DNA repair in human lymphocytes was seen for some 60 hours following acute irradiation. It is speculated that improved radical detoxification and improved DNA repair may reduce the probability of spontaneous carcinogenesis. Thus it is proposed to weigh the probability of detriment for a hit cell within a multicellular system against the probability of benefit through adaptive responses in other hit cells in the same system per radiation exposure. In doing this, the net effect of low doses of low LET radiation in tissue with individual cells being hit by energy deposition events could be zero or even beneficial. Since there was no simple additivity of equal effects from repeated exposures to equal doses and because of the potential effect of adaptive cell responses on the spontaneous evolution of malignancy in tissue, the extrapolation of risk with absorbed dose reaching down to zero, does not appear to be generally valid. [References: 52]