Studies of ionizing radiations of different quality are discussed with particular emphasis on damage to DNA of mammalian cells. Three related themes are followed. Firstly, inactivation and mutation experiments with ultrasoft X-rays and slow heavy ions, coupled with theoretical analyses of the structures of the radiation tracks, have emphasized the biological importance of localized track features over nanometre dimensions. This led to the suggestion that the critical physical features of the tracks are the stochastic clusterings of ionizations, directly in or very near to DNA, resulting in clustered initial molecular damage including various combinations of breaks, base damages, cross-links, etc. in the DNA. The quantitative hypotheses imply that final cellular effects from high-LET radiations are dominated by their more severe, and therefore less repairable, clustered damage, and that these are qualitatively different from the dominant low-LET damage. Second, relative effectiveness of different types of radiation led to questions on the mechanisms of induction of chromosome exchanges. The high efficiency of ultrasoft X-rays, despite their very short track lengths, suggested that single sites of DNA damage may lead to exchanges by a molecular process involving interaction with undamaged DNA. Also it is shown that a single site-specific DNA break, introduced by restriction enzymes, sometimes leads to a large deletion when misrepaired by cell extracts. These deletions occur between short DNA repeats, and are therefore a form of 'illegitimate' recombination, but clearly do not involve the interaction of two damage sites. Third, it was shown that cells from patients with the radiosensitive disorder ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) lack a post-irradiation recovery process. The sensitivity of AT cells to high LET radiations was found to be reduced relative to that for normal cells, reinforcing the concept that high LET damage is less easy to repair. AT patients are prone to lymphoreticular cancers, and their cells show characteristic chromosomal rearrangements, which may be associated with misrepair at specific genomic sequences. Similarly, studies of radiation-induced leukaemia in the mouse have implicated rearrangement at specific interstitial chromosome sites, which are rich in telomere-like repeat sequences. [References: 94]