PURPOSE: The purpose of this paper is to address some aspects of the many considerations that need to go into a dose prescription in boron neutron capture therapy (BNCT) for brain tumors; and to describe some methods to incorporate knowledge from animal studies and other experiments into the process of dose prescription. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Previously, an algorithm to estimate the normal tissue tolerance to mixed high and low linear energy transfer (LET) radiations in BNCT was proposed. We have developed mathematical formulations and computational methods to represent this algorithm. Generalized models to fit the central axis dose rate components for an epithermal neutron field were also developed. These formulations and beam fitting models were programmed into spreadsheets to simulate two treatment techniques which are expected to be used in BCNT: a two-field bilateral scheme and a single-field treatment scheme. Parameters in these spreadsheets can be varied to represent the fractionation scheme used, the 10B microdistribution in normal tissue, and the ratio of 10B in tumor to normal tissue. Most of these factors have to be determined for a given neutron field and 10B compound combination from large animal studies. The spreadsheets have been programmed to integrate all of the treatment-related information and calculate the location along the central axis where the normal tissue tolerance is exceeded first. This information is then used to compute the maximum treatment time allowable and the maximum tumor dose that may be delivered for a given BNCT treatment. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: The effect of different treatment variables on the treatment time and tumor dose has been shown to be very significant. It has also been shown that the location of Dmax shifts significantly, depending on some of the treatment variables--mainly the fractionation scheme used. These results further emphasize the fact that dose prescription in BNCT is very complicated and nonintuitive. The physician prescribing the dose would need to rely on some method, like the one developed here, to come up with an appropriate dose prescription