The Francis H. Burr Proton Therapy Center has a 230 MeV cyclotron from which proton beams are directed to two isocentric gantries, a stereotactic intracranial beam line, and an eye line. Because of improved physical dose distribution, proton radiotherapy allows dose escalation to improve local tumor control in anatomic sites and histologies where local control is suboptimal with photons. The improved dose localization also reduces normal-tissue doses with an anticipated reduction in acute and late toxicity. Clinical treatment protocols, developed to exploit the dosimetric advantages of protons over photons, have been grouped into two broad categories. In the first, dose is escalated for anatomic sites where local control with conventional radiation doses has been suboptimal. In the second, normal-tissue sparing with protons is designed to minimize acute and late toxicity. Treatment of patients on clinical research protocols has been encouraged. Patient treatments began on the first gantry in November 2001; on the eye line in April 2002; on the second gantry in May 2002; and on the stereotactic intracranial line in August 2006. The facility currently treats 60 patients per day, including up to six children daily under anesthesia. Dose-escalation studies have been completed for early stage prostate cancer (in conjunction with Loma Linda University) and sarcomas of the cervical spine/base of skull and thoracolumbosacral spine. Protocols are in progress or development for carcinoma of the nasopharynx, paranasal sinus carcinoma, non-small-cell lung carcinoma, locally advanced carcinoma of the prostate, hepatocellular carcinoma, and pancreatic cancer. Studies evaluating the use of protons for morbidity reduction include protocols for craniospinal irradiation in conjunction with systemic chemotherapy for medulloblastoma, retinoblastoma, pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma, other pediatric sarcomas, and accelerated, hypofractionated partial breast irradiation for T1N0 breast carcinomas. For pediatric patients, protons have also been accepted as an alternative to photons for children enrolled in Children's Oncology Group (COG) protocols. Treatment of patients on these studies has often required the development of new treatment techniques (i.e., matching abutting fields for craniospinal irradiation), respiratory gating, and development of appropriate clinical infrastructure support (i.e., increase in availability of pediatric anesthesia) to allow appropriate treatment. In addition, a clinical research infrastructure for protocol development and data management is required. Results to date indicate that proton radiation therapy offers several potential treatment advantages to patients that can be studied in the setting of clinical trials. Patients' willingness to enter these clinical trials seems to be quite high; accrual to selected studies has been favorable