PURPOSE: Definitive radiation therapy for breast cancer with regional nodal involvement often introduces treatment of adjacent abutted regions. Many methods describe techniques to achieve an effective transverse plane match. Our facility recently adopted a matching technique using asymmetric jaws to beam-split all portals along the central axis plane. Our technique uses one isocenter to treat the opposed tangential breast fields, the supraclavicular port and the posterior axillary field. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Our linear accelerator has four collimator jaws capable of being set independently. The longitudinal (Y) jaws beam-split all the portals at the match plane, namely the upper border of the tangential beams and the bottom border of the nodal fields. The transverse (X) jaws define the lateral borders of the nodal fields, and in a near beam-split fashion in conjunction with customized Cerrobend, block the lung for the tangential beams. The unique isocenter is chosen along the mid-bridge through the tangential match plane. Dosimetric qualities and calculational techniques of the asymmetric beams were analyzed with ionimetric water scans, ion chamber studies, and film. The match-line is clinically confirmed with composite port films. RESULTS: Our dosimetric studies show asymmetric jaws provide nearly equivalent field edge definition and superior absorption in comparison with Cerrobend blocks. The use of one isocenter results in a reduction of in-room treatment time by a factor of two. The burden of lifting heavy Cerrobend blocks has been removed. A composite port film, which includes the medial tangential and supraclavicular ports, shows a perfect match-line in all cases. Similar composite port films taken with our previous technique of geometric matching with collimator and table angulation exhibit slight overlap or underdose regions in many cases. CONCLUSION: Our treatment technique takes full advantage of dual asymmetric jaws to achieve a perfect match-line, necessitates only one isocenter and set-up point, and supplies more absorption in reference to lung and contralateral breast dose. The pure match-line is accompanied by the fact that the patient does not have to move in any direction