The problem of neutrons produced by many of the high-energy x-ray therapy machines (10 MV and above) is reviewed, and the possible risk their presence poses to radiotherapy patients is estimated. A review of the regulatory background containing a summary of the recommendations of the U.S. Council of State Governments (USCSG), and of the International Electro-Technical Commission (IEC), as well as an indication that recommendations will be forthcoming from the National Council on Radiation Protection (NCRP) and the International Commission of Radiological Protection (ICRP) is presented. The neutrons in question are produced by high-energy photons (x rays) incident on the various materials of the target, flattening filter, collimators, and other essential components of the equipment. The neutron yield (per treatment dose) increases rapidly as the megavoltage is increased from 10 to 20 MV, but remains approximately constant above this. Measurements and calculations of the quantity, quality, and spatial distribution of these neutrons and their concomitant dose are summarized. Values of the neutron dose are presented as entrance dose, midline dose (10-cm depth), and integral dose, both within and outside of the treatment volume. These values are much less than the unavoidable photon doses which are largely responsible for treatment side effects. For typical equipment, the average neutron integral dose from accelerator-produced neutrons is about 4-7 g cGy (per treatment cGy), depending on the treatment plan. This translates into an average dose of neutrons [averaged over the body of a typical 70-kg (154 lb) patient] of 0.06-0.10 cGy for a treatment of 1000 cGy. Using these neutron doses and the best available neutron risk coefficients, it is estimated that 50 X 10(-6) fatal malignancies per year due to the neutrons may follow a typical treatment course of 5000 rads of 25-MV x rays. This is only about 1/60th of the average incidence of malignancies for the general population. Thus, the cancer risk to the radiotherapy patient from accelerator-produced neutrons poses an additional risk to the patient that is negligible in comparison. [References: 55]