BACKGROUND: The main techniques and results in stereotactic radiosurgical treatment of endocranial AVM's are described and compared. The authors also report their preliminary experience in the treatment of 6 consecutive pediatric patients with intracerebral vascular malformations using gamma knife (GK) radiosurgery. METHODS: The various stereotactic radiosurgery methods currently used (charged-particle beam, modified linear accelerator, and GK) are described. At the Department of Neurosurgery in Verona, from February 1993 to February 1996, stereotactic GK radiosurgery was performed on 721 patients, including 20 of pediatric age (3%). Of the 78 AVMs, 7 (9%) were diagnosed in children. One patient was lost at follow-up. Among the remaining 6 children, there were 3 males and 3 females with a mean age of 12.3 years (range, 5-16 years). Treatment general anesthesia was needed only in 1 case. The AVM volume was always less than 10 cc. After completion of the procedure, children were discharged from the hospital the following day. RESULTS: The follow-up period ranged from 4 months to 29 months (median 18.8 months). The angiographic confirmed total obliteration is used as the end point of an AVM treated radiosurgically, and usually requires 2 to 3 years. All the patients are alive; four of the treated children are neurologically normal and one patient has clinically improved to a normal neurological status. The sixth patient has fixed neurological deficits that existed prior to treatment. Among the three cases with a follow-up period of over 2 years, complete obliteration has been angiographically confirmed in 2 patients and subtotal in 1 patient. In the three remaining patients with follow-up periods less than 2 years, serial MR images suggest subtotal obliteration in 2 cases and no significant change in one patient who had undergone treatment within the current year. To date, neither persistent GK radiosurgery-related complications nor bleeding following stereotactic radiosurgery has been described. CONCLUSIONS: The review of literature and our preliminary results suggest that also in children, as in adults, the use of stereotactically delivered irradiation represents a safe and effective technique obtaining complete obliteration of AVMs previously considered surgically inaccessible due to their location and poor response to resection and/or embolization