PURPOSE: The effect of local injection of anticancer drugs by balloon catheter, i.e., balloon occluded arterial infusion (BOAI), on the prognosis of cervical cancer treated with radiotherapy were retrospectively estimated. METHODS AND MATERIALS: Sixty-five patients with cervical cancer (Stage I-IV) treated by irradiation were included in the study. Among the 65 cases, 2 were in Stage I, 13 in Stage II, 40 in Stage III, and 10 in Stage IV. Patients who received surgical resection were excluded. Thirty-nine patients received BOAI and 44 received brachytherapy. Twenty-six patients were not indicated for BOAI because of insufficient renal function, hepatic complications, hematological complications, and refusal from the patients. Cisplatin (0.9-1.7 mg/kg), Adriamycin (0.7-0.9 mg/kg), and Pepleomycin (0.4-0.6 mg/kg) were administered simultaneously into the bilateral internal iliac arteries by BOAI. External irradiation was given by 10 MV x-ray. Total dose administered to the regional lymph nodes by the external irradiation was 48.3 +/- 8.7 Gy. Radium was used at brachytherapy. The dose delivered by the brachytherapy at point A was 45.3 +/- 14.9 Gy. Patients without brachytherapy received 26.1 +/- 19.1 Gy of boost irradiation by the external photon beam. The survival probabilities of the patients were calculated by Kaplan-Meier method. RESULTS: The 5-year survival rates of the Stage III patients with and without BOAI were 53 +/- 13% and 24 +/- 18%, respectively (p = 0.036). By multivariate analyses using Cox's proportional hazard model, stage and BOAI were selected as significant predictors of the prognosis. Transient bone marrow suppression was observed in about half of the patients with BOAI. No significant increase of the incidence of the late radiation damage by BOAI in rectum or in urinary bladder was observed. CONCLUSION: Balloon occluded arterial infusion of anticancer drugs may improve the prognosis of the patients with cervical cancer without increasing the incidence of the late radiation damage. A larger scale prospective randomized study is desired