The dose to the contralateral breast has been associated with an increased risk of developing a second breast malignancy. Varying techniques have been devised and described in the literature to minimize this dose. Metal beam modifiers such as standard wedges are used to improve the dose distribution in the treated breast, but unfortunately introduce an increased scatter dose outside the treatment field, in particular to the contralateral breast. The enhanced dynamic wedge is a means of remote wedging created by independently moving one collimator jaw through the treatment field during dose delivery. This study is an analysis of differing doses to the contralateral breast using two common clinical set-up techniques with the enhanced dynamic wedge versus the standard metal wedge. A tissue equivalent block (solid water), modeled to represent a typical breast outline, was designed as an insert in a Rando phantom to simulate a standard patient being treated for breast conservation. Tissue equivalent material was then used to complete the natural contour of the breast and to reproduce appropriate build-up and internal scatter. Thermoluminescent dosimeter (TLD) rods were placed at predetermined distances from the geometric beam's edge to measure the dose to the contralateral breast. A total of 35 locations were used with five TLDs in each location to verify the accuracy of the measured dose. The radiation techniques used were an isocentric set-up with co-planar, non divergent posterior borders and an isocentric set-up with a half beam block technique utilizing the asymmetric collimator jaw. Each technique used compensating wedges to optimize the dose distribution. A comparison of the dose to the contralateral breast was then made with the enhanced dynamic wedge vs. the standard metal wedge. The measurements revealed a significant reduction in the contralateral breast dose with the enhanced dynamic wedge compared to the standard metal wedge in both set-up techniques. The dose was measured at varying distances from the geometric field edge, ranging from 2 to 8 cm. The average dose with the enhanced dynamic wedge was 2.7-2.8%. The average dose with the standard wedge was 4.0-4.7%. Thermoluminescent dosimeter measurements suggest an increase in both scattered electrons and photons with metal wedges. The enhanced dynamic wedge is a practical clinical advance which improves the dose distribution in patients undergoing breast conservation while at the same time minimizing dose to the contralateral breast, thereby reducing the potential carcinogenic effects