For the step-and-shoot intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) technique, the combination of high dose rate, multiple beam segments and low dose per segment can lead to significant differences between the planned dose and the dose delivered to the patient. In this technique, a dose delivery inaccuracy known as the 'overshoot' effect is caused by the dose servo control system. This typically occurs in the first and last beam segments and causes an over- and underdose, respectively. Some dose positional error in the segment sequence is also possible there. Commercial ionization chambers (RK-type) and radiographic Kodak films were used for the measurements. The reported results were obtained using the Pinnacle(3)-V6.2 treatment planning system and a Varian Clinac 21 EX linear accelerator equipped with a 120-leaf Millennium MLC. The dose inaccuracy measurements were based on the comparison of the dose and profiles for reference fields and fields irradiated with the step-and-shoot technique. For our linear accelerators, an 'overshoot' effect ranging from 0.1 to 0.6 MU was found, corresponding to a dose rate from 100 to 600 MU min(-1), respectively. For segments with off-axis distances from 0 to 5.5 cm with >3.5 MU per segment and all dose rates, a MLC leaf-position error of <1 mm was measured. For segments with an off-axis distance of 9.5 cm, a positional error >2 mm was measured for 600 MU min(-1) and 1 MU per segment. The purpose of this study was to find a correction method for segmental dose errors caused by the 'overshoot' effect when small monitor unit and high dose rate are used. To better represent the fluctuation of the segment doses in the beam, a dose ratio between reference and step-and-shoot irradiated fields was defined. A method for the correction of segment dose inaccuracies and a quality assurance programme for the 'overshoot' effect were developed. The ordering of the biggest segment shape in the segment sequence was studied for ten randomly selected prostate patients planned for IMRT. The results of this work can be used to improve the agreement between the planned and delivered doses for IMRT