A method was developed to determine the accuracy of multileaf collimator (MLC) positioning using transmitted dose maps measured by a scanning liquid ionization chamber electronic portal imaging device (SLIC-EPID). Several MLC fields were designed, using the Varian C-series standard MLC-80, as reference fields for open fields. The MLC leaves were then shifted from the reference positions along the direction of MLC leaf movement towards the central axis from 0.1 to 1.6 mm. The electronic portal images (EPIs), acquired for each case, were converted to two-dimensional dose maps using an appropriate calibration method and the relative dose difference maps were then calculated. The experiment was then performed at non-zero gantry angles in the presence of an anthropomorphic phantom for typical prostate and head and neck fields. Several standard edge detection algorithms were also used in order to find the shifted MLC leaf position. In addition, the short-term reproducibility of MLC leaf positioning was evaluated using the above-mentioned methods. It was found that the relationship between the relative dose difference and MLC leaf spatial displacement is linear. A variation of 0.2 mm in leaf position leads to approximately 4% change in the relative dose values for open fields. The variation of the relative dose difference for phantom studies depends on the phantom positioning and the EPI normalization. From the standard edge detection algorithms, used in the current study, the 'Canny' algorithm was found to be the optimum method to identify the minimum detectable MLC leaf displacements with a precision of approximately 0.1 mm for all cases. However, the result of edge detection algorithms generally is binary and there is no additional information compared to the relative dose maps. The reproducibility of MLC positions was found to be within 0.3 mm. In conclusion, a SLIC-EPID can be used for regular quality assurance (QA) of MLC leaf positioning. Despite significant difference in the pixel size of the acquired SLIC-EPIs, it can be concluded that the SLIC-EPID can be used for MLC quality assurance protocols with similar accuracy compared to amorphous silicon (a-Si) EPID results