The aim of this work is to investigate experimentally the detector size effect on narrow beam profile measurements. Polymer gel and magnetic resonance imaging dosimetry was used for this purpose. Profile measurements (Pm(s)) of a 5 mm diameter 6 MV stereotactic beam were performed using polymer gels. Eight measurements of the profile of this narrow beam were performed using correspondingly eight different detector sizes. This was achieved using high spatial resolution (0.25 mm) two-dimensional measurements and eight different signal integration volumes A X A X slice thickness, simulating detectors of different size. "A" ranged from 0.25 to 7.5 mm, representing the detector size. The gel-derived profiles exhibited increased penumbra width with increasing detector size, for sizes >0.5 mm. By extrapolating the gel-derived profiles to zero detector size, the true profile (Pt) of the studied beam was derived. The same polymer gel data were also used to simulate a small-volume ion chamber profile measurement of the same beam, in terms of volume averaging. The comparison between these results and actual corresponding small-volume chamber profile measurements performed in this study, reveal that the penumbra broadening caused by both volume averaging and electron transport alterations (present in actual ion chamber profile measurements) is a lot more intense than that resulted by volume averaging effects alone (present in gel-derived profiles simulating ion chamber profile measurements). Therefore, not only the detector size, but also its composition and tissue equivalency is proved to be an important factor for correct narrow beam profile measurements. Additionally, the convolution kernels related to each detector size and to the air ion chamber were calculated using the corresponding profile measurements (Pm(s)), the gel-derived true profile (Pt), and convolution theory. The response kernels of any desired detector can be derived, allowing the elimination of the errors associated with narrow beam profile measurements