During the last decade, stereotactic radiotherapy has widely improved in France. Thus one should study the present situation and its future trend. QUANTITATIVE NEED: Considering single dose radiotherapy, there are about 900 to 1,000 cases treated per year. However, the trend towards more fractionated treatment will disturb this temporary equilibrium; thus more machine time will be necessary. QUALITATIVE NEED: Stereotactic radiotherapy is practiced by multi-disciplinary teams including physicians, physicists and scientific specialists. Radiotherapists and physicist are responsible for treatment planning and evaluation as well as for clinical and methodological research. Accordingly, they should possess computers, treatment planning systems, etc. Such teams are necessary to carry out complex irradiations. GENERAL EVOLUTION: Fractionation of irradiation nowadays seems mandatory for most intracranial tumors except metastases and small regular arteriovenous malformations. Heterogeneity of lesion dose is related to the geometry and the physics of convergent fixed or mobile beams. It can be improved and the healthy tissue irradiation can be diminished using the multi-isocentric planning for complex lesion or with micro multi leaf collimators. MODALITIES OF STEREOTACTIC RADIOTHERAPY ACCORDING TO LESION TYPE: For neurinomas of the acoustic nerve, fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy yields few of the complications published after single dose stereotactic radiotherapy. The same can be said for meningiomas although some series reported very few complications after single dose stereotactic radiotherapy. Solitary metastases without systemic evolution, not situated on the mid-line, are favorable candidates for palliative single dose stereotactic radiotherapy. The conjunction with total brain irradiation seems to be useful. Small arteriovenous malformations will be treated with single dose stereotactic radiotherapy, whereas voluminous and/or geometrically complex nidus could benefit from protons or photon beams modulated by micro multi leaf collimators and a few fractions. EXTRA-CRANIAL STEREOTACTIC RADIOTHERAPY: Single dose stereotactic radiotherapy and fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy will be used as boost in various situations such as massif facial and in all sorts of tumors in the body specially when lesions are close to critical organs