In many radiotherapy clinics an independent verification of the number of monitor units (MU) used to deliver the prescribed dose to the target volume is performed prior to the treatment start. Traditionally this has been done by using methods mainly based on empirical factors which, at least to some extent, try to separate the influence from input parameters such as field size, depth, distance, etc. The growing complexity of modern treatment techniques does however make this approach increasingly difficult, both in terms of practical application and in terms of the reliability of the results. In the present work the performance of a model-based approach, describing the influence from different input parameters through actual modeling of the physical effects, has been investigated in detail. The investigated model is based on two components related to megavoltage photon beams; one describing the exiting energy fluence per delivered MU, and a second component describing the dose deposition through a pencil kernel algorithm solely based on a measured beam quality index. Together with the output calculations, the basis of a method aiming to predict the inherent calculation uncertainties in individual treatment setups has been developed. This has all emerged from the intention of creating a clinical dose/MU verification tool that requires an absolute minimum of commissioned input data. This evaluation was focused on irregular field shapes and performed through comparison with output factors measured at 5, 10, and 20 cm depth in ten multileaf collimated fields on four different linear accelerators with varying multileaf collimator designs. The measurements were performed both in air and in water and the results of the two components of the model were evaluated separately and combined. When compared with the corresponding measurements the resulting deviations in the calculated output factors were in most cases smaller than 1% and in all cases smaller than 1.7%. The distribution describing the calculation errors in the total dose output has a mean value of -0.04% and a standard deviation of 0.47%. In the dose calculations a previously developed correction of the pencil kernel was applied that managed to contract the error distribution considerably. A detailed analysis of the predicted uncertainties versus the observed deviations suggests that the predictions indeed can be used as a basis for creating action levels and tracking dose calculation errors in homogeneous media