Electron beam treatments may benefit from techniques to verify patient positioning and dose delivery. This is particularly so for complex techniques such as mixed photon and electron beam radiotherapy and electron beam modulated therapy. This study demonstrates that it is possible to use the bremsstrahlung photons in an electron beam from a dual scattering foil linear accelerator to obtain portal images of electron beam treatments. The possibility of using Monte Carlo (MC) simulations to predict the electron beam treatment portal images was explored. The MC code EGSnrc was used to model a Varian CL21EX linear accelerator (linac) and to characterize the bremsstrahlung photon production in the linac head. It was found that the main sources of photons in the electron beam are the scattering foils, the applicator and the beam-shaping cut-out. Images were acquired using the Varian CL21EX linac and the Varian aS500 electronic portal imager (EPI); four electron energies (6, 9, 12, 16 MeV), and different applicator and cut-out sizes were used. It was possible to acquire images with as little as 10.7 MU per image. The contrast, the contrast-to-noise ratio (CNR), the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), the resolution and an estimate of the modulated transfer function (MTF) of the electron beam portal images were computed using a quality assurance (QA) phantom and were found to be comparable to those of a 6 MV photon beam. Images were also acquired using a Rando anthropomorphic phantom. MC simulations were used to model the aS500 EPID and to obtain predicted portal images of the QA and Rando phantom. The contrast in simulated and measured portal images agrees within +/-5% for both the QA and the Rando phantom. The measured and simulated images allow for a verification of the phantom positioning by making sure that the structure edges are well aligned. This study suggests that the Varian aS500 portal imager can be used to obtain patient portal images of electron beams in the scattering foil linacs