BACKGROUND: Orbital exenteration can be accomplished by either an external eyelid-sparing or eyelid-sacrificing approach. The purpose of this study was to describe an alternative technique for orbital exenteration and its specific advantages over traditional methods. METHODS: A retrospective analysis at a tertiary care referral center was performed. Three patients with sinonasal malignancy (two cases) and fulminant invasive fungal sinusitis (one case) are reported. Intraconal involvement was evident in all patients by imaging and surgical pathology. Advanced endoscopic techniques in conjunction with image guidance and soft-tissue shaver technology were used for resection in all cases. RESULTS: The orbit was successfully exenterated via an eyelid-sparing endoscopic approach with minimal blood loss in all three patients. Exenteration was completed within 30-45 minutes. Uninvolved superior and lateral orbital periosteum was preserved in all patients, which permitted cavity "mucosalization" within 8 weeks. Two patients are alive without disease at 15-month follow-up. One patient with persistent cavernous sinus malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor died 4 months after resection despite proton beam therapy. CONCLUSION: This preliminary experience showed endoscopic power-assisted orbital exenteration to be an effective technique for exenteration of the orbit. Endoscopic power-assisted orbital exenteration offers two critical advantages: (1) direct transnasal control of the ophthalmic artery as it emerges from the optic foramen and (2) the ability to preserve the uninvolved superior and lateral periorbita. This can facilitate mucosal coverage of the exenterated space and obviate the need for tissue grafts and/or packing. Additionally, intraorbital pathology can be better visualized and blood loss and operative time are minimized. This technique may serve as an important adjunct for management of the orbit in patients with sinonasal malignancy or invasive fungal rhinosinusitis