Thirty years ago Michel M. Ter-Pogossian and Henry N. Wagner, Jr. wrote an article that was published in Nucleonics on the cyclotron production of isotopes for biomedical research. In this report we use the Nucleonics paper as the framework to relate their predictions to the current state of the art, we have broken this into four key areas; commercially available cyclotrons, costs of operating cyclotron facilities, the emergence of compact accelerators, and the cyclotron production of long-lived radionuclides for therapeutic applications. Companies producing cyclotrons commercially are; General Electric Medical Systems, CTI Cyclotron Systems, EBCO, IBA, NNK/Oxford Instruments, and Japan Steel Works. The majority of these machines are now negative ion systems, which allows the option of dual irradiation of two targets. All have a modular design, which allows the system to be customed to a particular facility's need. Cyclotron facility costs have increased dramatically since 1966. We have determined that the bulk of the increase lies in the costs to establish and staff the facility. Increased regulation by Federal and State organizations has severely impacted operational expenses. The growing demand for PET radiopharmaceuticals in the clinical arena has increased the staffing requirements of the facility. Surprisingly, the costs of cyclotrons have not increased (in terms of real dollars) especially when one considers the much greater sophistication in target design, automation, and computer control that has occurred during this time. Innovative approaches are being taken to develop low energy accelerators that are capable of producing PET isotopes. These are easier to operate and less expensive than commercially available cyclotrons. Although many of these systems have been developed, none have as yet gained commercial recognition. A number of groups have begun to address the production of longer lived isotopes on biomedical cyclotrons. Development of this technology may well help to further progress in targeted radiotherapy. We present an overview of potentially useful isotopes