The Varian millennium 120 multileaf collimator has curved leaf ends. Transmission through the leaf ends generates a small asymmetric penumbral dose effect. This design can lead to hot spots between neighbouring beam segments during step and shoot IMRT dose delivery. We have observed some matchlines with film for clinical beams optimized using the pinnacle radiotherapy treatment planning system; hence we sought to verify the optimum leaf offset required to minimize the matchline effect. An in-house program was created to control the MLC leaf banks in 2 cm steps with a 2 cm gap. The gap was varied by the following offset values from 0.0 to 0.1 cm. Two types of radiographic films (Kodak EDR and XV films) and a radiochromic film (Gafchromic MD-55-2) were used to measure the optical density maps. The films were positioned in a solid water phantom perpendicular to the beam axis and irradiated at d(max) using a 6 MV photon beam. An ion chamber (IC4) was used to measure point doses for normalization in a beam umbral minima position. The relative mean peak to valley dose ratios measured with no leaf offset were 1.31, 1.30 and 1.31 for the XV, EDR2 and Gafchromic films, respectively. For a 0.07 cm gap per leaf and a performance of end leaf repeatability of 0.01 cm, the central matchline was reduced to about 1.0 for all dosimeters, with two mini-peaks measured as 1.05, 1.05 and 1.08 each side of the matchline, for XV, EDR2 and Gafchromic, respectively. The average relative dose across the umbra for this offset was XO-mat V = 1.01, EDR = 1.01 and radiochromic film = 1.02, respectively. While we expected the beam penumbral tails from segment neighbours to cause overprediction of the dose in the central valley regions due to the energy response of radiographic films, by normalizing all dosimeters to an ion chamber reading in the minimum we could not observe any major shape distortion between the radiographic film and radiochromic film results. In conclusion, relative doses measured by radiographic and radiochromic films agree well with IC4 within +/-2%